--- PAGE 1 ---
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2018, 10(3): 193–225 
https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20160078
193
Consumer Valuation of Fuel Costs and Tax Policy: 
Evidence from the European Car Market†
By Laura Grigolon, Mathias Reynaert, and Frank Verboven*
To what extent do car buyers undervalue future fuel costs, and what 
does this imply for tax policy? To address both questions, we show 
it is crucial to account for consumer mileage heterogeneity. We use 
product-level data for a panel of European countries and exploit fuel 
cost variation by engine. Despite a modest undervaluation of fuel 
costs, fuel taxes are more effective in reducing fuel usage than prod-
uct taxes. They also perform better in terms of welfare, even when 
usage demand is held fixed. The reason is that fuel taxes better target 
high mileage consumers to purchase fuel efficient cars. (JEL D12, 
H25, H31, L62, L71)
G
overnments are using a variety of policies to reduce ​CO​2​ emissions from pas-
senger cars. A central question in this debate is whether it is preferable to focus 
on fuel taxes or on policies that encourage the sales of fuel efficient cars, such as 
standards or product taxes based on the cars’ fuel economy. Fuel taxes are often 
favored because they directly influence the car usage decision and hence the amount 
of ​CO​2​ emissions. Furthermore, they may also indirectly influence the car purchase 
decision if consumers take into account their expected future fuel costs. However, 
if driving behavior is rather inelastic and if consumers are myopic and ignore future 
fuel cost savings when purchasing a car, then it may be more effective to directly 
influence the car purchase decision through standards or through up-front product 
taxes on cars with low fuel economy (possibly combined with product subsidies 
on cars with high fuel economy). In sum, fuel taxes may be more effective because 
they reduce car usage when driving behavior is not perfectly inelastic, while product 
taxes may be more effective because they can stimulate consumers to buy more fuel 
efficient cars if there is an investment inefficiency because of consumer myopia (see 
Allcott and Greenstone 2012 for a recent detailed review).
* Grigolon: McMaster University, 1280 Main Street West Hamilton, ON L8S 4M4, Canada (email: Laura.
Grigolon@mcmaster.ca); Reynaert: Toulouse School of Economics, University of Toulouse Capitole, 21 Allée 
de Brienne, 31000 Toulouse, France (email: Mathias.Reynaert@gmail.com); Verboven: University of Leuven, 
Naamsestraat 69, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium, and C.E.P.R. London (email: Frank.Verboven@kuleuven.be). We are 
particularly grateful to the three referees for helpful comments. We also thank Bruno De Borger, Jan Bouckaert, 
James Sallee, Jo Van Biesebroeck, and seminar participants at several seminars and conferences. We also gratefully 
acknowledge financial support from the Science Foundation–Flanders (FWO), the KU Leuven Research Council 
(Program Financing grant) and SSHRC (Insight Development Grant). The authors declare that they have no rele-
vant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20160078 to visit the article page for additional materials and author 
disclosure statement(s) or to comment in the online discussion forum.

--- PAGE 2 ---
194	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
In this paper, we contribute to this debate by properly accounting for consumer 
heterogeneity, which implies an important advantage of fuel taxes over product 
taxes that has not been considered before. Fuel taxes better target the right consum-
ers, those with a high mileage, to purchase the most fuel efficient cars. This targeting 
effect makes fuel taxes more effective in reducing total fuel usage than product taxes, 
even when consumers are moderately shortsighted and mileage is perfectly inelas-
tic. We establish this result in two steps. We first ask whether consumers undervalue 
or correctly value the discounted future fuel costs when purchasing a new car. After 
estimating the degree of consumer myopia, we then compare the effectiveness of a 
fuel and product tax in reducing total fuel usage and ​CO​2​ emissions, where the taxes 
are held revenue equivalent. We also compare the welfare effects of both taxes in 
correcting for the externality costs of driving. In both steps, it is crucial to account 
for consumer heterogeneity. In the first step, accounting for consumer heterogene-
ity avoids possibly biased parameter estimates of consumers’ valuation of future 
fuel costs. In the second step, mileage heterogeneity implies that heavy users (and 
hence heavy polluters) will be more responsive to fuel taxes than product taxes, with 
implications for both the effectiveness and welfare effects of the taxes.
To address these questions, we build on the aggregate random coefficients logit 
demand model of Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995), and introduce a specification 
that accounts for heterogeneous responses to fuel costs because consumers may differ 
in their annual mileage. We conservatively assume that driving behavior (mileage) is 
perfectly inelastic with respect to the fuel price. We show that the relative effective-
ness of fuel taxes versus product taxes in reducing total fuel usage depends on two 
key parameters: consumers’ valuation of future fuel costs and mileage heterogeneity.
To estimate the demand model, we use detailed data at the level of the car model 
and engine variant for a panel of seven European countries during 1998–2011. The 
institutional features of the European car market provide a new way to help iden-
tify consumer responses to fuel costs because for most car models consumers can 
choose between two engine types: gasoline and diesel. Diesel cars are typically more 
expensive (by on average about 30 percent), but they also involve much lower fuel 
costs because of a higher fuel economy (by about 20 percent) and a lower diesel fuel 
price (by about €0.20 per liter, depending on the specific country’s fuel tax policy). 
The consumers’ intertemporal choice problem is correspondingly simpler in Europe 
than in the United States, since consumers can trade-off the higher initial purchase 
price of a diesel engine against the future fuel cost savings of an otherwise nearly 
identical car. To empirically identify consumer responses to fuel costs, we include 
car model fixed effects, thereby exploiting fuel cost variation between engines of 
the same car model. Chugh, Cropper, and Narain (2011) and Verboven (2002) also 
exploit fuel cost variation between gasoline and diesel cars: the former in a hedonic 
price study of Indian twin car models, the latter in a demand study that focuses on 
substitution within both fuel types but abstracts from substitution across products. 
Our approach complements other recent identification approaches, mainly for the 
US market, where diesel cars are practically absent: these studies typically can rely 
on rich time-series variation in the price of gasoline, interacted with fuel economy 
variation across products (e.g., Klier and Linn 2010; Li, Timmins, and von Haefen 
2009; Allcott and Wozny 2014; Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer 2013; Langer and

--- PAGE 3 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
195
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
Miller 2013; and Sallee, West, and Fan 2016). We document that time series varia-
tion is not important in our setting to identify consumer responses to fuel economy.1
Regarding the valuation of future fuel costs, we find evidence of only modest 
undervaluation: for one euro saving in discounted future fuel costs, consumers are 
willing to pay €0.91 in the form of a higher initial purchase price, and the hypothesis 
of correct valuation cannot be rejected. This estimate remains robust in a variety of 
other specifications, and it is obtained under assumptions that are favorable to find-
ing undervaluation, i.e., a relatively low interest rate (compared to market rates at 
which households can borrow) and a relatively long average vehicle lifetime.
Regarding the effectiveness of fuel taxes versus product taxes, we find that it is 
crucial to account for mileage heterogeneity. Without accounting for mileage het-
erogeneity, a fuel tax would be slightly less effective than a product tax in reducing 
total fuel usage, because of the modest undervaluation of future fuel costs. However, 
once we account for mileage heterogeneity, a fuel tax turns out to be more effective 
because it specifically targets the high mileage consumers to substitute to cars with 
a higher fuel economy. In our base specification, a €0.50 fuel tax reduces total fuel 
usage by an additional 6.1 percent, in comparison with a revenue equivalent product 
tax. In our robustness analysis, fuel taxes remain more effective than product taxes, 
but the gap becomes smaller. In particular, a fuel tax reduces total fuel usage by an 
additional 0.6 percent in comparison with a product tax when we add a conservative 
upper bound on the heterogeneity in fuel cost valuation for other reasons than mile-
age (such as discounting or fuel price expectations, as in Anderson, Kellogg, and 
Sallee 2013).2 Note that these conclusions depend on our finding that there is only 
limited undervaluation of future fuel costs. If there would be stronger consumer 
myopia, our conclusion would be reversed: a product tax would then be more effec-
tive in reducing total fuel usage (despite the mileage heterogeneity).3
To further explore the effectiveness of fuel taxes under mileage heterogeneity, 
we also consider the impact of separately raising the price of diesel fuel or gaso-
line fuel (rather than simultaneously raising both). This is of broader interest, since 
countries are increasingly using fuel-specific tax policies to encourage the adoption 
of cars with alternative fuels (such as methanol). We find that the role of mileage 
heterogeneity becomes even more important under such fuel-specific tax policies. 
For example, raising the diesel fuel price without changing the gasoline fuel price 
implies a drop in diesel market share by 12.3 percent, but a disproportionately larger 
drop in diesel fuel usage by 37.8 percent.4 We also find that the lower fuel costs for 
diesel cars explain about half of the diesel market share in Europe, though less so in 
the most recent years.
1 The time-series variation in gasoline prices tends to be larger in the United States than in Europe, and the car 
sales and price information is often observed at a higher frequency (monthly instead of annually). 
2 Intuitively, the gap in effectiveness shrinks because consumers no longer only sort on mileage but also on other 
factors. Further work is needed to assess whether the added heterogeneity is independent as we assumed, or perhaps 
positively correlated with mileage. 
3 These conclusions are obtained under the assumption that driving behavior is perfectly inelastic. If we would 
allow driving behavior to depend on fuel prices, our results would be strengthened in favor of fuel taxes, since fuel 
taxes would also induce consumers to reduce their car usage. 
4 Miravete, Moral, and Thurk (forthcoming) studies how the favorable treatment of diesel cars may have pro-
tected the domestic European producers against foreign competition in the Spanish market. They do not explicitly 
model mileage heterogeneity, and our analysis implies that this entails even greater environmental costs.

--- PAGE 4 ---
196	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
Finally, we consider the welfare implications of our analysis. We compare the 
impact of a fuel and product tax on the various welfare components: decision con-
sumer surplus, consumer losses from mis-optimization (internality), externality 
costs, and tax revenues. We find that a fuel tax performs much better than a product 
tax, even when usage demand itself is perfectly inelastic. Fuel taxes require a lower 
total tax amount to achieve the same externality reduction because they directly 
target the high mileage consumers. In contrast, product taxes affect all consumers 
in the same way, which results in lower welfare gains despite the modest under-
valuation of future fuel costs. This again stresses the importance of accounting for 
mileage heterogeneity in car taxation policy.
Our paper relates to several strands in the literature. First, our finding of at most 
only modest undervaluation of future fuel costs contributes to a long empirical 
debate since Hausman (1979). He estimated consumers’ implicit interest rates in 
their intertemporal trade-off between paying a higher initial purchase price for air 
conditioners in exchange for future energy cost savings. Most work on the automo-
bile market appears to find mixed evidence for the degree of undervaluation of future 
fuel costs; see Greene (2010) and Helfand and Wolverton (2011) for recent reviews. 
Allcott and Wozny (2014) finds evidence of moderate undervaluation, while Busse, 
Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013); Sallee, West, and Fan (2016); Chugh, Cropper, and 
Narain (2011); and Verboven (2002) find more or less correct valuation of future 
fuel costs relative to the initial purchase price of a car. Bento, Li, and Roth (2012) 
shows through simulations that a failure to account for consumer heterogeneity in 
willingness to pay for fuel costs may be responsible for a sorting bias toward finding 
undervaluation, but they do not provide an empirical analysis to quantify its impor-
tance. Our paper incorporates mileage heterogeneity to avoid this bias, and at the 
same time, it also incorporates other sources of consumer heterogeneity to avoid a 
reverse sorting bias. To our knowledge, no other work has systematically incorpo-
rated this to investigate whether consumers undervalue future fuel costs.5
Second, we contribute to a literature that compares the effectiveness and wel-
fare effects of energy taxes versus product taxes and standards. Allcott and Wozny 
(2014) provides a detailed review on the relative effectiveness of both policy instru-
ments. On the one hand, energy taxes directly affect usage, so they can be effective 
in reducing energy consumption if usage is sufficiently elastic. On the other hand, 
a product tax on the energy-inefficient product (or a subsidy on the energy-efficient 
product in their discussion) can better encourage the demand for energy-efficient 
products if consumers undervalue future energy cost savings, thereby reducing an 
investment inefficiency.6 Our contribution to this debate is to show that even if usage 
demand is fully inelastic and if consumers do not value future fuel costs to their full 
5 Verboven (2002) incorporates mileage heterogeneity to explain the consumers’ decision to buy a gasoline 
or diesel car and obtains estimates on their implicit interest rates when trading off the higher purchase price of a 
diesel engine against the future fuel cost savings. However, he focuses only on the decision to buy a gasoline or 
diesel engine, conditional on purchasing a certain car model. Although this avoids biases in estimating implicit 
interest rates, the framework does not allow us to assess how taxes shift consumers to purchase other cars in policy 
counterfactuals. 
6 Jacobsen (2013) and Jacobsen and van Benthem (2015) show that product taxes may also distort the used 
car market and households’ scrappage decision. Our data is limited to new vehicle sales so we abstract from these 
effects in our analysis.

--- PAGE 5 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
197
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
extent, an energy tax can still be more effective than a product tax. The reason is 
that if consumers are heterogeneous in their annual mileage, an energy tax better 
targets the high mileage consumers than a product tax.7 Because high users are 
most affected by energy taxes, they are more inclined to substitute toward more fuel 
efficient products.
Other work has also covered several aspects of consumer heterogeneity, but did 
not treat usage heterogeneity and the possibility of fuel cost undervaluation in a 
unified empirical framework. In a related theoretical paper, Allcott, Mullainathan, 
and Taubinsky (2014) compares the combined welfare effects of an energy tax and 
a product tax. They also stress the role of consumer heterogeneity, but they focus 
on heterogeneity in the extent of undervaluation (or “attentiveness”). In our welfare 
analysis, we focus on the role of mileage heterogeneity, a natural starting point since 
this distribution is directly observed. Nevertheless, in future work it would be inter-
esting to extend the welfare evaluation to allow for both heterogeneity in attentive-
ness, mileage, and product quality. Our welfare analysis is also complementary to 
recent work by Jacobsen et al. (2016). They develop a sufficient statistic to measure 
the welfare loss of not accounting for heterogeneity in externalities when design-
ing taxes. Innes (1996) and Fullerton and West (2002, 2010) indeed showed that 
energy taxes are preferable in a framework with heterogeneity that considers both 
choices of mileage and vehicle.8 Compared to this literature, our structural frame-
work explicitly focuses on the role of mileage heterogeneity and how this impacts 
the performance of fuel versus product taxes, while allowing for mean undervalu-
ation of consumers.
Third, there is a large literature on estimating demand systems for automobiles. 
Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995); Petrin (2002); and others have shown how to 
make use of aggregate sales data to estimate rich substitution patterns between dif-
ferentiated cars. While this work has often included a random taste coefficient for 
“miles per dollar,” we show how to relate this random coefficient more explicitly to 
consumer mileage heterogeneity. This makes it possible to use the aggregate demand 
model to address environmental questions such as the effects of tax policies on total 
fuel usage, whereas previous applications with aggregate data could only assess a 
more limited set of effects.9 There is already an important empirical literature that 
uses micro-level data to thoroughly investigate the effects of ­environmental policies 
on both car purchase and car usage decisions (e.g., Goldberg 1998; Bento et al. 
7 Our finding that an energy tax can be more effective than a product tax does not mean that a product tax cannot 
be effective in itself. In an interesting recent paper, Klier and Linn (2015) uses data from three EU countries and 
finds that product taxes can considerably shift sales toward cars with lower emissions. Our own results confirm 
this, but in addition, we show that energy taxes are even more effective because they better target consumers with 
different mileage. 
8 See also Feng, Fullerton, and Gan (2013) and Knittel and Sandler (forthcoming) for a discussion about welfare 
effects of taxation in transport with heterogenous users. 
9 For example, Adamou, Clerides, and Zachariadis (2014) estimates an aggregate demand system to assess the 
effects of feebates in Germany (combination of car subsidy for fuel efficient cars with tax for fuel inefficient cars). 
They can look at the effects on demand and consumer surplus, but not at the effects on fuel usage since they do not 
explicitly model consumer mileage. Huse and Lucinda (2014) considers the effects of a Swedish subsidy program 
to cars with sufficiently low ​CO​2​ emissions (where cars are more likely to be eligible if they run on alternative 
fuels). They assess the effects on demand and emissions, but without accounting for mileage heterogeneity in the 
demand model.

--- PAGE 6 ---
198	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
2009; Gillingham 2012; and D’Haultfæuille, Givord, and Boutin 2014). However, 
applications with micro data are typically limited to a single country and a short 
time period. Our aggregate demand model with mileage heterogeneity thus consid-
erably broadens the scope of applications, since aggregate data can be analyzed for 
a large set of countries and a longer time period.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I develops the demand 
model, incorporating the consumers’ intertemporal trade-off between the initial pur-
chase price of the car and future fuel costs, and highlighting the key parameters 
that drive consumer responses to fuel taxes versus product taxes: a future valuation 
parameter and mileage heterogeneity. Section II describes the data and Section III 
provides details on the empirical estimation strategy and the identification issues. 
Section IV presents and discusses the demand parameter estimates and implications 
for consumers’ valuation of future fuel costs. Section V presents policy counterfac-
tuals—in particular, a comparison between fuel tax and product taxes based on fuel 
economy. Section VI concludes.
I.  The Model
When consumers decide to purchase a new car, they face the intertemporal 
trade-off between the initial purchase price of the car and the expected future fuel 
costs. Forward-looking consumers have a high willingness to pay for fuel efficient 
cars that save on fuel costs, whereas myopic consumers have a low willingness to 
pay for such cars. In subsection IA, we model this intertemporal choice problem. We 
model the consumers’ discounted expected future fuel costs in the aggregate random 
coefficients logit demand model of Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995). Our model 
accounts for heterogeneous responses because consumers may differ in their annual 
mileage and hence in their expected future fuel costs. In subsection IB, we use this 
demand model to discuss the different impact of two alternative taxes: a fuel tax and 
a product tax on the cars’ fuel economy. This will serve as the basis to motivate our 
demand specification and subsequent policy counterfactuals.
A. Demand
There are ​T​ markets, defined as country/year combinations, with ​I​t​ potential con-
sumers in each market ​t​. Consumers are assumed to purchase a car only in the mar-
ket where they are located. To simplify notation, we suppress the market subscript ​
t​ in this section.
We define a car as a combination of a baseline model ​j​ and engine variant ​k​. 
Consumer ​i​ may either choose a car model ​j​ with engine variant ​k​ , or decide not 
to buy a car and consume the outside good ​0​. The decision to buy a car affects the 
intertemporal budget constraint in two ways. First, consumers pay a capital cost, the 
initial purchase price ​p​jk​. Second, they pay the present discounted value of expected 
future fuel costs ​G​ijk​. The conditional indirect utility of consumer ​i​ for car model ​j​ 
and engine variant ​k​ is
(1)	
​u​ijk​  =  ​x​jk​ ​β​ i​ x​ − ​α​i​ ( ​p​jk​ + γ ​G​ijk​ ) + ​ξ​jk​ + ​ε​ijk​ , ​

--- PAGE 7 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
199
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
where ​x​jk​ is a vector of observed car and engine characteristics and ​ξ​jk​ is an unob-
served product characteristic. The vector ​β​ i​ x​ captures individual-specific valuations 
for the product characteristics, ​α​i​ is the marginal utility of income, and ​ε​ijk​ is a 
remaining individual-specific valuation for car ​jk​ , modeled as an extreme value 
(logit) random variable. The utility of the outside good is normalized to ​u​i00​ = ​ε​i00​. 
The parameter ​γ​ is Allcott and Wozny’s (2014) “attention weight” or “future valua-
tion” parameter. If ​γ = 1​ , consumers correctly trade-off the car’s purchase price ​p​jk​ 
against the present discounted value of future fuel costs ​G​ijk​. If ​γ < 1​, consumers 
undervalue future payoffs, and if ​γ > 1​, consumers overvalue the future payoffs.
Our main focus in (1) is on the specification of ​G​ijk​ , i.e., consumer ​i​’s present 
discounted value of expected future fuel costs for model ​j​ with engine ​k​. We allow 
fuel costs ​G​ijk​ to be consumer-specific because of heterogeneity in annual mileage. 
Furthermore, ​G​ijk​ depends on expected fuel prices, on the relevant time horizon and 
the interest rate. More precisely, we define the present value of expected fuel costs 
over the car’s lifetime as follows:
(2)	
​G​ijk​  =  E​[​ ∑ 
s=1
​ 
S
  ​ ​(1 + r)​ −s​ ​β​ i​ m​ ​e​jk​ ​g​ks​]​, ​
where ​β​ i​ m​ is consumer ​i​’s expected annual mileage, measured in kilometers (km); ​
e​jk​ is the fuel consumption of car ​j​ with engine ​k​ , measured in liter per kilometer (or 
“gallons per mile” in the United States), i.e., the inverse of a car’s fuel economy; ​g​ks​ 
is the fuel price of engine type ​k​ (either gasoline or diesel fuel) at time ​s​ , measured in 
€ per liter; ​r​ is the interest rate at which consumers discount future fuel costs; and ​S​ is 
the time horizon over which consumers value fuel cost savings, which may be related 
to the car’s expected lifetime.10 We model annual mileage and expected future fuel 
costs in a way that makes the expression for ​G​ijk​ simple and identification transparent.
First, we allow annual mileage ​β​ i​ m​ to be heterogeneous across consumers using the 
empirical distribution of mileage. This addresses a possible sorting bias in aggregate 
demand models that would arise if high mileage consumers choose to buy more fuel 
efficient cars (as discussed in Bento, Li, and Roth 2012). It also enables us to assess 
how consumers with different mileage respond to alternative tax policies.11 Our 
specification assumes that annual mileage ​β​ i​ m​ is perfectly inelastic, i.e., independent 
of the fuel price. Empirical evidence shows that the driving behavior is indeed rel-
atively inelastic; see, e.g., Goldberg (1998); Hughes, Knittel, and Sperling (2008); 
Bento et al. (2009); and Gillingham (2012). If we would allow driving behavior to 
depend on fuel prices, our result that a fuel tax is more effective than a product tax 
would be strengthened.
10 In practice, vehicle lifetime may not be fixed but may partly depend on mileage, and we account for this 
possibility in a robustness analysis below. 
11 Other work has accounted for mileage heterogeneity by using micro-level data, see e.g., Bento et al. (2009) 
and Gillingham (2012) for the US market. Allcott and Wozny (2014) accounts for mileage heterogeneity in an 
aggregate nested logit model by measuring average annual mileage per car model. Their approach does not, how-
ever, allow for policy counterfactuals since it does not account for the possibility that consumers with different 
mileages substitute to other cars in response to tax policies.

--- PAGE 8 ---
200	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
Second, we assume that fuel prices for each engine type ​k​ , ​g​ks​ , follow a random 
walk, so the consumers’ expected fuel price at time ​s​ is equal to the current fuel 
price (at time ​s  =  0​): ​E​[​g​ks​]​  =  ​g​k​. This assumption is consistent with recent find-
ings of Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (2013). Some studies have instead considered 
alternative models for expectations about future fuel prices (based on actual future 
prices or past prices). In a literature review, Alquist, Kilian, and Vigfusson (2011) 
concludes that these alternative models do not appear to outperform models with 
expectations that are only based on current prices. In our robustness analysis, we 
will use future prices as a proxy for consumers’ price forecasts of fuel prices, which 
gives similar results.
Under these assumptions, we can rewrite the present value of expected future fuel 
costs for consumer ​i​ buying car ​j​ with engine ​k​ as
(3)	
​G​ijk​  =  ρ ​β​ i​ m​ ​e​jk​ ​g​k​ , ​
i.e., consumer ​i​’s annual mileage ​β​ i​ m​ (in kilometers) times the car’s fuel consump-
tion ​e​jk​ (in liter/kilometer) times the current fuel price ​g​k​ (in €/liter)km times a 
capitalization coefficient ​ρ​:
(4)	
​ρ  ≡  ​ ∑ 
s=1
​ 
S
  ​ ​(1 + r)​ −s​  =  ​ 1 
__ 
r ​[1 − ​(1 + r)​ −S​]​, ​
which converts the annual fuel cost ​β​ i​ m​ ​e​jk​ ​g​k​ into a net present value. Intuitively, the 
capitalization coefficient ​ρ​ measures the extent to which consumers trade-off the ini-
tial purchase price of a car against annual fuel costs, and lies in the interval ​[ 0, S ]​. If 
consumers are fully myopic (​r  →  ∞​), then ​ρ  =  0​: consumers then give no weight 
to current annual fuel costs. In contrast, if consumers do not discount the future 
(​r  →  0​), then ​ρ  =  S​. Consumers then weigh the current annual fuel costs by a 
factor ​S​ relative to the purchase price of the car: they count on a “pay-back time” ​S​ 
when investing in a car with a higher fuel economy.
We can substitute (3) into (1) to write consumer ​i​’s conditional indirect utility for 
car model ​j​ and engine variant ​k​ as
(5)	
​u​ijk​  =  ​x​jk​ ​β​ i​ x​ − ​α​i​ ( ​p​jk​ + γρ ​β​ i​ m​ ​e​jk​ ​g​k​ ) + ​ξ​jk​ + ​ε​ijk​ .​
This is close to a standard random coefficients utility specification, where 
​β​i​  =  ( ​β​ i​ x​ , ​α​i​ , ​β​ i​ m​ )​ are the random coefficients for which means and (co)variances 
may be estimated. The future valuation parameter ​γ​ and the capitalization coeffi-
cient ​ρ​ are additional parameters, but they are not separately identified from the 
scale of ​β​ i​ m​. We will therefore make use of prior information on the empirical distri-
bution of mileage ​β​ i​ m​ in our empirical analysis, so that ​γρ​ becomes identified from 
the scale of ​β​ i​ m​.
One can then use (4) to interpret the estimate of ​γρ​ in three different ways. First, 
as in Hausman (1979), one can retrieve the consumers’ implicit interest rate ​r​ at 
which they discount the future, for a given value of the car’s expected lifetime ​S​ and 
setting ​γ  =  1​. Second, one can retrieve the consumers’ required payback time ​S​ ,

--- PAGE 9 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
201
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
setting ​r  =  0​ and ​γ  =  1​. Third, as in Allcott and Wozny (2014), one can impose 
both a market interest rate ​r​ and an expected lifetime ​S​ to retrieve the attention 
weight parameter ​γ​ , measuring the extent to which consumers undervalue (​γ < 1​) 
or overvalue the future (​γ > 1​). We will focus on the third approach.
We complete the demand model by assuming that each consumer ​i​ chooses the 
model ​j​ with engine ​k​ that maximizes her utility out of all possible alternatives in 
the choice set (including the outside option). Furthermore, assume that the ran-
dom coefficients ​β​i​  =  ( ​β​ i​ x​ , ​α​i​ , ​β​ i​ m​ )​ come from a distribution ​F​β​ (β; θ )​ , where ​θ​ are 
means and (co)variance parameters to be estimated; assume also that ​β​i​ is indepen-
dent of the individual- and product-specific taste valuations ​ε​ijk​ , which come from 
the type I extreme value distribution. Under these assumptions, the predicted market 
share for model ​j​ with engine ​k​ is the probability that ​jk​ gives the highest utility:
(6)  ​s​jk​(ξ; ρ, θ)​ 
=  ​∫ β​ 
 
 ​  ​ 
exp ( ​x​jk​ ​β​ x​ − α( ​p​jk​ + γρ ​β​ m​ ​e​jk​ ​g​k​ ) + ​ξ​jk​ ) 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
1 + ​∑ ​j ′ ​​ 
J ​ ​∑ ​k ′ ​=1​ 
​K​​j ′ ​​  ​ exp ( ​x​​j ′ ​k ′ ​​ ​β​ x​ − α( ​p​​j ′ ​k ′ ​​ + γρ ​β​ m​ ​e​​j ′ ​k ′ ​​ ​g​​k ′ ​​ ) + ​ξ​​j ′ ​k ′ ​​ )
 ​  d​F​β​ (β; θ ).​
Observed sales can then be equated to the predicted market share times the num-
ber of potential consumers ​I​ , i.e., ​q​jk​  =  ​s​jk​(ξ; ρ, θ)​ I​. Following Berry, Levinsohn, 
and Pakes (1995) and subsequent work, the market shares can be approximated by 
Monte Carlo simulation with ​R​ draws of ​β​i​  =  ( ​β​ i​ x​ , ​α​i​ , ​β​ i​ m​ )​ from the distribution ​
F​β​ (β ; θ )​.
B. Consumer Responses to Taxes
We will estimate the demand model to compare the effectiveness (in reducing 
total fuel usage) and the total welfare impact of two alternative taxes: a fuel tax and 
a product tax on the cars’ fuel consumption. We will do this comparison in detail in 
our policy counterfactuals after having estimated the demand model. In this section, 
we give an overview of the possible effects of both taxes on the composition of new 
car sales. This provides economic intuition, and will highlight the specific features 
that need careful attention in our empirical specification.
A fuel tax ​t​ k​ G​ is a tax on gasoline and/or diesel fuel ​g​k​ , whereas the product tax ​t​ k​ E​ 
is a tax on a car’s fuel consumption ​e​jk​. The product tax on a car’s fuel consumption ​
e​jk​ is equivalent to the commonly used product tax on a car’s ​CO​2​ emissions, since 
there is a proportional relationship between both. The two taxes affect a consumer’s 
conditional indirect utility (5) as follows:
	
​u​ijk​  =  ​x​jk​ ​β​ i​ x​ − ​α​i​(​p​jk​ + ​t​ k​ E​ ​e​jk​)​ − ​α​i​ γρ ​β​ i​ m​ ​e​jk​(​g​k​ + ​t​ k​ G​)​ + ​ξ​jk​ + ​ε​ijk​ .​
Previous work has stressed the relative advantages of both taxes. On the one 
hand, a fuel tax is preferable because it directly reduces usage and hence (pollution) 
externalities, as long as driving behavior is not perfectly inelastic. On the other 
hand, a product tax on the cars’ fuel consumption can be preferable if consumers 
undervalue their future fuel costs when purchasing a durable good. Put differently,

--- PAGE 10 ---
202	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
a fuel tax mainly serves to correct for externalities by affecting the driving decision, 
while a product tax on fuel consumption mainly corrects for an investment ineffi-
ciency from consumer myopia. Allcott and Greenstone (2012) provides interesting 
further discussion of both effects (where they focus on a subsidy for the energy 
efficient product, instead of a tax on the energy inefficient product).
In our analysis, we assume that utilization is perfectly inelastic, so we rule out 
the possibility that a fuel tax corrects for an externality by reducing utilization. We 
instead focus on another role of fuel taxes: in the presence of consumer mileage het-
erogeneity, a fuel tax especially targets the high mileage consumers. Hence, a fuel 
tax may be more effective in reducing total fuel usage than a product tax, even if it 
does not directly affect utilization decisions.
To more precisely see the role of mileage heterogeneity and consumer myopia in 
the impact of a fuel tax versus a product tax, it is useful to consider the case where 
the taxes do not depend on the fuel type ​k​ , i.e., ​t​ k​ G​  =  ​t​ G​ and ​t​ k​ E​  =  ​t​ E​ for both gas-
oline and diesel cars. Using ​q​jk​  =  ​s​jk​(ξ; ρ, θ)​ I​ and the expression (6) for ​s​jk​(ξ; ρ, θ)​ , 
online Appendix A shows that a small increase of ​t​ G​ and ​t​ E​ has the following effect 
on the demand for product ​jk​:
	
​ ∂ ​q​jk​ 
____ 
∂ ​t​ G​ ​  =   −​∫ β​ 
 
 ​ ​α​i​ γρ ​β​ i​ m​ ​s​ijk​(​e​jk​ − ​_ 
e ​ i​ + ​s​i0​ ​_ 
e ​ i​)​ d​F​β​ (β ) I,
	
​ ∂ ​q​jk​ 
____ 
∂ ​t​ E​ ​  =   −​∫ β​ 
 
 ​ ​α​i​ ​s​ijk​(​e​jk​ − ​_ 
e ​ i​ + ​s​i0​ ​_ 
e ​ i​)​ d​F​β​ (β ) I​,​
where ​_ 
e ​ i​  =  ​∑ j​ ​ ​∑ k​ ​ ​e​jk​ ​s​ijk​ /​(1 − ​s​i0​)​ is the expected fuel consumption over cars pur-
chased by consumer ​i​. We can make the following two observations.
First, the effect of both taxes depends on the sign of the term ​e​jk​ − ​_ 
e ​ i​ + ​s​i0​ ​_ 
e ​ i​. 
If all cars would have the same fuel consumption, i.e., ​e​jk​  =  e​ for all ​jk​ , then ​
e​jk​ − ​_ 
e ​ i​  =  0​. Both taxes would then reduce the demand for all cars, proportional to 
the aggregate consumer responses to the outside good ​s​i0​ and the price sensitivity 
parameter ​α​i​. The effect of both taxes is then similar to the effect of an industry-wide 
price increase. In contrast, if cars differ in their fuel consumption, then the demand 
for some cars can increase despite the tax increase. This will be the case for cars 
with a sufficiently low fuel consumption, i.e., ​e​jk​  <  ​_ 
e ​ i​ , and when there is limited 
substitution to the outside good (​s​i0​ small). In sum, both taxes have in common that 
they shift the composition of new car sales from cars with a high fuel consumption ​
e​jk​ to cars with a low fuel consumption.
Second, the effect of both taxes differs because of two factors: the future valua-
tion parameter (​γ​) and the extent of mileage heterogeneity (​β​ i​ m​). In the absence of 
mileage heterogeneity (​β​ i​ m​  =  ​β​ m​ for all ​i​), it can be shown that a fuel tax ​t​ G​ has 
exactly the same demand effect as a revenue-equivalent product tax ​t​ E​ when ​γ  =  1​ , 
and a weaker impact when ​γ  <  1​ (the investment inefficiency referred to above). 
When there is mileage heterogeneity, the comparison between the demand impact 
of both taxes becomes more complicated.
To summarize this, the price sensitivity parameter ​α​i​ and the extent of substitu-
tion to the outside good ​s​i0​ determine the general impact of both taxes, whereas the

--- PAGE 11 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
203
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
future valuation parameter ​γ​ and the extent of mileage heterogeneity ​β​ i​ m​ explain the 
differences in their impact. In our empirical analysis, we show how these parameters 
translate into differences in the effectiveness (in reducing total fuel usage) and the 
total welfare impact of both taxes.
II.  Data
Our main dataset is a rich panel of data from the European car market, obtained 
from a market research firm (JATO). The dataset includes the sales, prices, and 
product characteristics for every new passenger car sold during 1998–2011 in seven 
European countries: Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, and 
the United Kingdom. The data cover around 90 percent of the sales in the European 
Union.
The unit of observation is at the very detailed level of the car variant ​jk​ , i.e., 
the combination of a car model ​j​ equipped with engine ​k​. The car model ​j​ is a 
brand/model/body type combination, e.g., “Volkswagen Golf hatchback,” whereas 
the engine ​k​ consists of the fuel engine type (gasoline or diesel), displacement and 
horsepower, e.g., “gasoline, 1,390cc, 59kW”. Our highly disaggregate definition of 
a car variant makes it possible to capture all possible variation in fuel efficiency 
and engine performance. After excluding cars with extremely low sales (e.g., 
Bentley Arnage), we retain on average about 800 car variants per country/year, i.e., 
180 models with on average 4.4 engines. This results in a panel dataset of approxi-
mately 80,000 observations (car variants/countries/years).
Sales are defined as new vehicle registrations. Prices are suggested retail prices, 
including VAT and registration taxes which differ across markets and engines 
(separately obtained from the European Automobile Manufacturers Association). 
According to European survey data reviewed in Goldberg and Verboven (2005), 
discounts mainly vary by car model and country, which we will account for with a 
rich set of car and country fixed effects.12 Car characteristics include measures of 
vehicle size (curb weight, width, length, and height), engine performance (horse-
power and displacement) and fuel consumption (liter/100 km). In addition, based 
on a brand’s perceived country of origin, we construct a dummy for whether a model 
is of foreign or domestic origin in each country.13
We supplement this dataset with information on fuel prices, the empirical distri-
bution of annual miles traveled and other country/year-level information. Gasoline 
and diesel fuel prices by year and country are from the International Energy Agency 
(IEA 1998–2011). Fuel prices mainly vary over time, rather than across countries. 
Figure 1 plots the average annual price of gasoline and diesel fuel during 1998–2011 
(in real year 2000 euros) as well as the difference between the price of gasoline and 
diesel across countries. The top panel shows that gasoline and diesel fuel prices are 
12 For the United States, Langer and Miller (2013) exploits detailed transaction data. They find that discounts 
are higher for cars with higher fuel costs (conditional on time and vehicle fixed effects), and point out that this may 
imply a downward bias of the fuel cost coefficient by 13.7 percent (or higher). If discounts also vary with fuel costs 
in Europe, our fuel cost valuation parameter may also be biased downward to some extent. 
13 For example, the Volkswagen Golf is perceived as domestic by German consumers even though part of the 
production of Golf takes place in Spain.

--- PAGE 12 ---
204	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
increasing to reach peaks in 2008 and 2011. Diesel fuel is on average 16 percent 
less expensive than gasoline fuel, but the gap varies during the period. According 
to the bottom panel, the price of gasoline is higher than that of diesel in almost all 
countries. The gap between both fuel prices is the highest in the Netherlands and 
Belgium. The gap often changes in the same direction across countries, but the mag-
nitudes of these changes may differ considerably.
The empirical distribution of annual miles traveled is from the 2007 UK National 
Travel Survey by the the Department for Transport (2013), a rich nationally 
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
 Gasoline
 Diesel
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Belgium
Germany
Italy
Spain
Average fuel price (euro/liter)
Difference in gasoline diesel prices
France
Great Britain
Netherlands
Figure 1. Gasoline and Diesel Prices across Time and Countries
Notes: The top panel of the figure shows average yearly prices (in real 2005 euros) of gasoline and diesel between 
1998 and 2011. The bottom panel shows the difference in gasoline and diesel prices for each of the countries 
between 1998 and 2011.
Source: DG ECFIN

--- PAGE 13 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
205
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
representative survey of 20,000 individuals. We plot the distribution in Figure 2. The 
distribution of mileage is skewed to the right: 20 percent of the population drives 
less than 7,000 km/year, 50 percent drives less than 10,200 km/year, 80 percent 
drives less than 18,000 km/year, while 10 percent drives more than 25,000 km/year. 
According to this survey, average annual mileage is 14,700 km/year. There is no 
such detailed information on the empirical mileage distribution in other countries of 
our dataset. Eurostat reports average annual mileages by country, using somewhat 
differing methodologies. These averages are in line with the most reliable aver-
age of the distribution reported in the UK National Travel Survey14. We therefore 
assume that mileage in the other countries follows the same distribution as in the 
United Kingdom. Finally, we use information on GDP/capita in each country/year 
to scale car prices and annual fuel costs in the same units across countries, and we 
use population per country/year to construct the variable for the number of potential 
consumers.
Summary Statistics—Table 1 provides summary statistics (mean and standard 
deviation) for the variables included in our empirical demand model. As one may 
expect, characteristics that may vary across both models and engines (price, horse-
power, annual fuel costs) show a higher dispersion around the mean than charac-
teristics that mainly vary across models (size, height, and the foreign dummy). 
Furthermore, several characteristics show considerable changes over the sample 
period: horsepower, fuel efficiency, and the fraction of diesel cars all increased 
between 1998–2011, whereas prices (relative to income) remained fairly stable.
Table 2 provides more detailed summary statistics broken down between gaso-
line and diesel cars. The share of new diesel car sales increased from 31.7 percent 
14 In the online Appendix, we reestimate the model estimated below by rescaling the UK-survey distribution 
around the mean from Eurostat for each country. This gives very similar results with a somewhat higher willingness 
to pay for fuel economy. We prefer to rely on the UK distribution for the main results below because most of the 
variance in the Eurostat data comes from different underlying measurements by governments. 
Frequency
Frequency
Mile
0
1
2
4
6
7
10 13 16 22 27 31 42 48
0
10
20
30
40
50
5
10
0
10
20
30
15
20
Figure 2. UK Mileage Survey
Notes: This figure shows the frequency distribution for the UK mileage survey in 2007. The left panel has x-axis 
bins in 1,000 of km traveled per year; the mean of the distribution is 14,761 km traveled. The right panel shows the 
distribution with equal sized 5,000 km bins and a plotted kernel.

--- PAGE 14 ---
206	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
in 1998 to 57.7 percent in 2011.15 Also the supply of diesel engines has increased 
proportionately more than that of gasoline engines: there were on average only 
1.6 diesel engines per car in 1998 (compared with 2.5 gasoline engines per car), 
and this number increased to 2.5 diesel engines per car in 2011 (and 3.0 gasoline 
engines per car). Diesel cars have 19 percent higher fuel efficiency than gasoline 
cars (on average 4.8 L/100 km for diesel cars versus 5.7 L/100 km for gasoline cars 
in 2011). Furthermore, as mentioned above, diesel fuel tends to be 16 percent less 
expensive than gasoline fuel costs. At the same time, a diesel car is on average 29 
percent more expensive than its gasoline counterpart.
15 This trend is common to all European countries, but there are also notable differences across countries (not 
shown in the table). Belgium, France, and Spain reached the highest share of diesel cars in 2011 (respectively, 
75.2 percent, 69.0 percent, and 69.0 percent), whereas the Netherlands had the lowest share (30.5 percent). The 
shares of diesel cars in the other countries varied between 45.5 percent and 55.4 percent. These differences may 
stem from unobserved country-specific factors, such as taxes or fuel station networks. To account for this, we inter-
act the diesel variation with country-specific fixed effects. 
Table 1—Summary Statistics
All years
1998 
2011 
Variable
Mean
SD
Mean
Mean
Sales (1,000 units)
1.8
5.1
2.7
1.3
Price/Income
1.1
0.7
1.1
1.1
Fuel consumption (L/100 km)
7.3
2.1
7.8
6.3
Yearly fuel costs/income (​× 100​)
4.3
1.5
4.7
4.3
Horsepower (in kW)
107.4
54.6
85.1
122.0
Size (1,000 cm​ ​ 2​ )
76.7
9.9
74.0
79.5
Height (cm)
148.5
10.7
144.1
150.1
Foreign (0 –1)
0.9
0.4
0.8
0.9
Diesel (0 –1)
0.4
0.5
0.3
0.5
Months market presence (1–12)
11.4
1.8
11.4
11.5
Observations
82,151
4,380
6,898
Notes: The table reports means and standard deviations of the main variables for all years and 
for years 1998 and 2011 separately. The total number of observations (model/engines combi-
nations and markets) is 82,166, where markets refer to 7 countries and 14 years.
Table 2—Summary Statistics by Engine Type
1998
2011
Gasoline
Diesel
Gasoline
Diesel
Market share (percent)
68.3
31.7
42.3
57.7
Number variants per model
2.5
1.6
3.0
2.5
Fuel consumption (L/100 km)
7.4
6.2
5.7
4.8
Price/income
0.7
0.9
0.6
0.9
Notes: The table reports summary statistics by engine type (gasoline and diesel) in year 1998 
and 2011. Fuel consumption and price/income are averages weighted by the number of units 
sold.

--- PAGE 15 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
207
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
III.  Estimation
We have a panel of ​T​ markets, defined as country-year combinations, to estimate 
the taste parameters of the market share system (6). We reintroduce the subscript ​
t​ to refer to these markets. For each market ​t​ and each car model ​j​ with engine ​k​ , 
we observe the sales ​q​jkt​ , prices ​p​jkt​ , fuel consumption ​e​jkt​ , a vector of other prod-
uct characteristics ​x​jkt​, and the fuel price ​g​kt​ (gasoline or diesel fuel). The observed 
market shares are computed as the sales ​q​jkt​ divided by the number of potential 
consumers ​I​t​ , ​s​jkt​  =  ​q​jkt​ /​I​t​ , and these observed shares are set equal to the predicted 
shares as given by (6).
We first discuss the specification of the taste parameters. Next, we discuss the 
assumptions regarding the error term ​ξ​jk​ and the GMM estimator. Finally, we discuss 
specific computational aspects of the estimator.
Specification of the Taste Parameters.—The taste parameters to be estimated are ​
γρ​ and ​θ​ , where ​γρ​ measures the extent to which consumers trade-off the initial 
purchase price of a car against annual fuel costs, and ​θ​ is a vector of distributional 
parameters for the random coefficients ​β​i​ = ( ​β​ i​ x​ , ​α​i​ , ​β​ i​ m​ )​ with distribution ​F​β​ (β; θ )​. 
Recall that ​β​ i​ x​ measures the individual-specific valuations for the product charac-
teristics ​x​jkt​ , ​α​i​ is the marginal utility of income, and ​β​ i​ m​ is consumer ​i​’s annual 
mileage. As discussed in Section I, ​γρ​ is not separately identified from the scale 
of ​β​ i​ m​. Furthermore, estimating a large number of distributional parameters ​θ​ , i.e., 
means and (co)variances, is computationally challenging, so we impose a number 
of restrictions.
First, we assume that ​β​ i​ m​ follows the empirical distribution of mileage. The mile-
age distribution we observe (discussed in Section II) is a conditional distribution, 
i.e., conditional on having purchased a car, while we need the unconditional dis-
tribution in our empirical model. In online Appendix A.3, we show how to map 
the observed conditional distribution into the unconditional distribution for ​β​ i​ m​. 
Incorporating the empirical distribution of mileage avoids a restrictive functional 
form and also ensures identification of ​γρ​. Second, following the previous literature, 
we assume ​β​ i​ x​ is normally distributed and we only estimate means and standard 
deviations of ​β​ i​ x​ , so we restrict their covariances to be equal to zero:
	
​β​ i​ x​  =  ​
_
 
β ​ x​ + ​Σ​ x​ ​ν​ i​  x​,​
where ​
_
 
β ​ x​ are the mean valuations, ​Σ​ is a diagonal matrix with standard deviations ​
σ​ x​ on the diagonal, and ​ν​ i​  x​ are standard normal random variables. Third, we specify ​
α​i​ to be inversely proportional to income ​y​t​ in market ​t​ , so ​α​i​  =  α/​y​t​.16
16 Similar to Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995), this specification approximates a Cobb-Douglas specifica-
tion ​α ln​(​y​t​ − ​p​jkt​ − γρ ​β​ i​  m​ ​e​jkt​ ​g​kt​)​  ≈  α ​y​t​ − αγ ​p​jkt​/​y​t​ − αγρ ​β​ i​ m​ ​e​jkt​ ​g​kt​/​y​t​ , when capitalized car expenditures are 
small relative to capitalized income. It is particularly convenient in our setting with many countries with differing 
exchange rates because prices and fuel expenditures are expressed in local prices relative to local income. We also 
considered a specification where ​α​i​ follows the empirical distribution of income, ​α​i​  =  α/​y​i​ , in a simpler specifica-
tion with fewer other random coefficients. This produced similar results, but was computationally much slower, so 
we focus on the model where ​α​i​  =  α/​y​t​ and a richer set of other random coefficients.

--- PAGE 16 ---
208	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
The specification of the conditional indirect utility of consumer ​i​ for car model ​j​ 
and engine variant ​k​ then becomes
(7)	
​u​ijkt​  =  ​x​jkt​ ​β​ i​ x​ − α ​p​jkt​/​y​t​ − αγρ ​β​ i​ m​ ​e​jkt​ ​g​kt​/​y​t​ + ​ξ​jkt​ + ​ε​ijkt​ .​
We will directly estimate and report ​αγρ​ as the “fuel cost parameter,” and then 
retrieve the future valuation parameter ​γ​ from dividing the estimate of ​αγρ​ by the 
estimate of the price parameter ​α​ and a value of the capitalization coefficient ​ρ​ 
(using the interest rate ​r​ and time horizon ​S​). The vector of product characteristics ​
x​jkt​ includes horsepower, size (width times length), height, foreign, and a diesel 
dummy variable interacted by country dummy variables. The latter captures val-
uation differences for diesel engines across countries, including unobserved dif-
ferences in taxation or in fuel station networks for diesel cars. We estimate mean 
valuations ​β​ x​ for all of these variables, and in addition, standard deviations ​σ​ x​ for 
horsepower, size, and foreign. In online Appendix B, we report specifications with 
additional random coefficients: this gives similar results, but less precise estimates 
for some of our main parameters of interest. This is consistent with earlier find-
ings of Reynaert and Verboven (2014) on the difficulties in precisely estimating too 
many random coefficient parameters.
GMM Estimator.—We exploit the panel nature of our dataset and specify the 
unobserved product characteristic as
(8)	
​ξ​jkt​  =  ​ξ​j​ + ​ξ​t​ + ​ξ ̃ ​jkt​ , ​
where ​ξ​j​ are fixed effects capturing time-invariant unobserved characteristics for a 
car model ​j​ , and ​ξ​t​ captures market fixed effects, modeled as country-specific fixed 
effects interacted with a time trend and a squared time trend. Since some models 
were introduced or eliminated within a year, we also include a set of fixed effects 
for the number of months for which the model was available in a country within 
a given year. The last term, ​ξ ̃ ​jkt​ , is the residual error term capturing the remain-
ing unobserved characteristics varying across models, engines, and markets. Since 
we include a full set of car model fixed effects, the demand parameters are identi-
fied from variation across engine variants within car models. The variation in the 
up-front purchase price and the expected fuel costs across cars will be of primary 
importance to identify the extent to which consumers discount the future.
The variation in fuel costs comes from four sources: aggregate fuel cost changes 
over time (different from the quadratic time trend), differences between gasoline and 
diesel engines, differences between engines within a fuel type holding fuel prices 
fixed, and remaining differences between engines within a fuel type stemming from 
fuel price variation. To assess the importance of each source, we regress our fuel 
cost variable on all other control variables included in the main specification, and 
then partition the variance of the residual fuel costs. We find that aggregate variation 
in fuel prices over time explains less than 0.01 percent of the total variance of fuel 
costs. Differences between gasoline and diesel engines explain 13 percent of the 
variance in fuel costs. Differences between engines within the same fuel type explain

--- PAGE 17 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
209
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
77 percent of the variance in fuel costs. The remaining 10 percent comes from fuel 
cost changes within engines and fuel type due to fuel price changes. Hence, most 
of the variation in fuel costs comes from engine variation (between and within fuel 
type). This is different from the existing literature, which has mainly relied on dif-
ferences in fuel prices over time to identify the extent to which consumers discount 
future fuel cost savings.
The error terms ​ξ ̃ ​jkt​ enter the market share system (6) in a highly nonlinear way. 
Following Berry (1994); Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995); and the subsequent 
literature, we use a contraction mapping to invert the market share system and solve 
for the vector of error terms ​ξ​t​ ̃ ​ in each market ​t​.
We account for the fact that price is an endogenous variable, which may be cor-
related with the error term ​ξ ̃ ​jkt​. The main identification assumption is that the error 
term is mean independent of the other product characteristics, ​E( ​ξ ̃ ​jkt​ | ​z​t​ )  =  0​ , 
where ​z​t​ is a matrix of all other product characteristics (including ​x​t​ , but also fuel 
consumption ​e​t​ and fuel prices ​g​t​). This assumption requires that all product char-
acteristics, except prices, are uncorrelated with unobserved car variant quality, 
conditional on the car model fixed effects. This appears reasonable in the short 
run when manufacturers cannot easily redesign their products. To the extent ​ξ ̃ ​jkt​ 
is correlated with the observed product characteristics, this may potentially bias 
the parameters.
These conditional moment restrictions imply an infinite number of unconditional 
moment restrictions
	
​E​(​h​jt​ ( ​x​t​ ) ​ξ ̃ ​jkt​)​  =  0​,
where ​h​jt​ ( ​x​t​ )​ is a vector of instruments formed by any function of the exogenous 
​x​t​. The GMM estimator for the complete vector of parameters is then the solution to
	
​min​ 
ϕ​  ​ ​ξ ̃ ​(ϕ​) ′ ​h(z​) ′ ​Ωh(z )​ξ ̃ ​(ϕ) ,​
where the vectors and matrices are stacked over all markets, ​ϕ​ is the vector of param-
eters (​γρ​ and ​θ​), and ​Ω​ is a weighting matrix using first-step residuals to account for 
heteroskedasticity.17 To construct the instruments ​h(z)​ , we follow Berry, Levinsohn, 
and Pakes (1995) and use the own-product characteristics, sums of the characteris-
tics of other products of the same firm, and sums of characteristics of other firms’ 
products. These instruments influence the markups of the differentiated products 
(either positively or negatively), and therefore serve as instruments for price. We 
also considered cost shifters as alternative instruments for price: following Reynaert 
and Verboven (2014), we include unit labor costs in the country of production, a 
dummy variable for whether the country of production and destination are the same, 
and steel prices interacted with vehicle weight (as a product-level cost shifter). Since 
steel prices and labor costs were not available for the year and country of production 
17 To minimize the objective function, we concentrate out the linear parameters ​β​ and the market fixed effects ​
ξ​t​ as discussed in Nevo (1999). Furthermore, following Baltagi (1994), we use a within transformation of the data 
to eliminate the car model fixed effects ​ξ​j​.

--- PAGE 18 ---
210	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
of about 8 percent of the observations and since the cost production process is more 
complicated, we do not take this as our main specification, but report the results in 
online Appendix B.
We use these instruments in a first stage to obtain initial parameter estimates and 
construct optimal instruments following Chamberlain (1987) and Berry, Levinsohn, 
and Pakes (1999). In a second stage, we use these optimal instruments to obtain 
more efficient parameter estimates, especially for the variances of the random coef-
ficients. Reynaert and Verboven (2014) provides detailed Monte Carlo evidence 
and an application with actual data to demonstrate that optimal instruments indeed 
greatly improve the efficiency of the estimator for this model.
Computational Considerations.—We account for a variety of computational 
issues to which recent work has drawn attention (see, for example, Goldberg and 
Hellerstein’s 2013 checklist). First, we approximate the high-dimension market 
share integral using 500 draws of a quasi-random number sequence for each of 
the 98 markets. The empirical distribution of mileage consists of 100 nodes, such 
that each mileage is interacted with 5 draws on the other dimensions. Second, we 
use a tight convergence level of ​1​e​ −12​ for the contraction mapping to solve the 
market share system in the inner loop within the GMM objective function. Third, 
to minimize the GMM objective function, we use a state-of-the-art optimization 
algorithm (the interior/direct algorithm in Knitro), provide analytical derivatives, 
and set a strict tolerance level at ​1​e​ −6​. Fourth, we use a set of 50 starting values to 
search for a global minimum, and verify the solution by checking the first-order and 
second-order conditions. Finally, as discussed above, we use optimal instruments in 
a second stage, which greatly improves the efficiency of the estimator, in particular 
for the standard deviations of the random coefficients.
IV.  Empirical Results
Although the importance of heterogeneity in consumer preferences has been 
emphasized in other work, the specific implications on how this may affect the esti-
mated valuation of future fuel cost savings has received limited attention. To assess 
how ignoring heterogeneity of consumer preferences may bias the extent to which 
consumers trade-off the car purchase price against future fuel cost savings, we com-
pare three alternative models. The first model is a simple logit model that imposes ​
β​ i​ x​  =  ​β​ x​ and ​β​ i​ m​  =  ​β​ m​ (i.e., the mean of the observed mileage distribution). The 
second model allows for heterogeneity in mileage and hence in the valuation of 
fuel costs, using the empirical mileage distribution ​β​ i​ m​ , while continuing to restrict ​
β​ i​ x​  =  ​β​ x​. The third model is our full random coefficients model, which allows for 
both mileage heterogeneity and heterogeneity in the valuations of some other car 
characteristics.
We first discuss the parameter estimates, and then what these imply for consum-
ers’ valuations of future fuel cost savings.
Parameter Estimates.—Table 3 reports the parameter estimates for these three 
demand models. First, consider the simple logit model. Price and annual fuel costs

--- PAGE 19 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
211
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
have the expected negative effect on utility, with ​α  =  − 4.52​ and ​αγρ  =  − 39.03​.18 
This implies ​γρ  =  8.63​ , which we discuss in detail below. The price parameter ​α​ 
is in line with previous results in the literature. In the online Appendix (Table B.1), 
we show that not using any instruments leads to a very low estimated price elasticity. 
We also present the first stage of the instrumental variable regression and find that 
the excluded instruments (sums of other product characteristics) correlate strongly 
with prices and are jointly significant with an F-stat of 291. Finally, we reestimate 
the logit model with cost shifters as additional instrumental variables. When we 
include the cost shifters as instruments, the price coefficient becomes smaller in 
absolute value, implying a higher estimate of ​γρ​ between ​10.6​ and ​13.28​.19
18 Online Appendix Table B.2 replicates Table 3 with mileages from Eurostat instead of the United Kingdom 
survey. 
19 The cost shifters we add in online Appendix Table B.1 are a measure of labor costs and a dummy for produc-
tion in market of sales (Cost IV I). In column Cost IV II, we add the steel price in the market of production and the 
steel price interacted with weight (both in logs). The estimated interaction of steel price with weight in the first stage 
is negative, which may be due to a gradual shift from steel to aluminum to comply with environmental regulations. 
This suggests that our cost instruments do not yet capture all elements of the production process (other relevant 
inputs, role of regulations that induce a shift from steel to aluminum). A more detailed analysis with additional data 
on product-specific cost shifters would be interesting in future research. 
Table 3—Parameter Estimates for Alternative Demand Models
Logit
RC Logit I
RC Logit II
Est.
SE
Est.
SE
Est.
SE
Panel A. Mean valuations
Price/inc. (​α​)
−4.52
0.19
−6.22
0.22
−5.33
0.21
Fuel costs/inc. (​αγρ​)
−39.03
1.41
−46.48
0.94
−47.11
9.22
Power (kW/100)
2.28
0.14
2.60
0.17
0.25
0.61
Size (​cm​ 2​/10,000)
13.25
0.44
16.69
0.48
16.77
2.02
Height (cm/100)
3.00
0.30
4.45
0.32
5.19
0.33
Foreign
−0.83
0.02
−0.75
0.02
−0.89
0.04
Panel B. Standard deviations of valuations
Power (kW/100)
−
−
−
−
1.95
0.25
Size
−
−
−
−
4.31
2.04
Foreign
−
−
−
−
0.49
0.43
Mileage distribution
	
No
	
Yes
	
Yes
Panel C. Valuations of future fuel costs
Fuel costs/price (​γρ​)
8.63
0.55
7.47
0.24
8.84
1.77
Future valuation ​γ​ (​r  =  6%​)
0.89
0.06
0.77
0.02
0.91
0.18
Consumer loss from mis-optim. (€)
73.07
328.13
39.71
Implicit interest rate (​T  =  10​)
2.77
5.69
2.31
Implicit interest rate (​T  =  15​)
7.87
10.32
7.48
Notes: The table reports the parameter estimates and standard errors for the different demand models. The logit 
assumes homogeneous mileage (​β​ i​ m​ = ​
_
 
β ​ m​) and homogeneous valuations for characteristics in ​x​jkt​ (​β ​ i​ x​ = ​
_
 
β ​ x​). The 
random coefficients Logit I assumes heterogeneous mileage (​β​ i​ m​) and homogeneous valuations for all the other 
characteristics in ​x​jkt​ (​β ​ i​ x​ = ​
_
 
β ​ x​). The random coefficients Logit II assumes heterogeneous mileage (​β​ i​ m​) and hetero-
geneous valuations for characteristics in ​x​jkt​ (​β​ i​ x​). Each specification includes model, market/diesel, and market/
time controls. The total number of observations (combinations of model/engine/market) is 82,151, where mar-
kets refer to 7 countries and 14 years. Panel C reports: the Ratio Fuel Costs/Price (γρ), which converts annual 
costs into their present discounted value; the attention weight or future valuation parameter (γ), calculated assum-
ing a market interest rate r = 6 percent and an expected car longevity S = 15; the consumer surplus losses due to 
mis-optimization per vehicle in euros; and the implicit interest rate that sets γ = 1 assuming a lifetime of 10 and 
15 years.

--- PAGE 20 ---
212	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
The estimated mean valuations ​β​ x​ for horsepower, size (length times width), 
and height are positive, while the mean valuation for foreign cars is negative. The 
­valuation of a diesel engine (apart from fuel costs) differs across countries (accord-
ing to the market/diesel controls, not shown in Table 3): diesel cars have a lower 
mean utility in Germany, the United Kingdom, and especially in the Netherlands. 
This may be due to unobserved higher car taxes, less elaborated diesel fuel station 
network, the popularity of alternative fuels (such as LPG in the Netherlands) or 
other unobserved preference differences.20
Now consider the random coefficients logit model with only mileage heterogene-
ity, and no heterogeneity for other characteristics (RC Logit I). Price and fuel costs 
again have the expected negative effect on utility, and the magnitude of the fuel cost 
effect slightly decreases (​α  =  − 6.22​ and ​αγρ  =  − 46.48​). The estimated mean 
valuations of the other product characteristics ​β​ x​ all have the same signs and are 
similar in magnitude as in the simple logit model.
Finally, consider the full random coefficients logit with heterogeneity for other 
characteristics (​σ​ x​) in addition to fuel costs (RC Logit II). As in the other two models, 
price and fuel costs have a negative effect on utility. Similarly, the mean valuation 
for size and height is positive, while the mean valuation for foreign cars is negative. 
The mean valuation for horsepower now becomes insignificant, but there is substan-
tial heterogeneity around the mean, implying that about half of the consumers value 
horsepower positively. There is also significant heterogeneity in the valuation of size, 
but essentially all consumers have a positive valuation. The standard deviation for the 
valuation of foreign cars is not significantly different from zero.
We considered a detailed sensitivity analysis with respect to various assumptions 
of our demand model. Online Appendix Table B.2 presents parameter estimates 
under alternative measures of our fuel cost variable: the use of average fuel prices 
per market (taking out the variation in fuel prices over time), the use of future prices 
instead of spot prices, the use of mean mileage reported by Eurostat for each coun-
try instead of the UK survey, and the use of model*fuel type fixed effects instead 
of model fixed effects. The empirical results remain very similar. Intuitively, this is 
because fuel cost variation is more important across engines and fuel types than over 
time or countries, as discussed above.
Online Appendix Table B.3 presents alternative specifications for our base ran-
dom coefficients model (RC Logit II): a model that includes a random coefficient 
for fuel type (RC Logit III),21 a model that adds heterogeneity in the valuation of 
fuel costs for other reasons than mileage (RC Logit IV),22 and a model that allows 
20 Online Appendix Table B.5 presents the results for the logit model, estimated separately for each of the 
countries. The parameter estimates have robust signs, and with some exceptions, the magnitudes of the effects are 
broadly comparable. 
21 Ideally, we would include such random coefficients for each country because the mean valuations differ 
considerably by country. However, this specification proved difficult to estimate, which is why we do not consider 
this to be our main specification. 
22 We follow Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (2013), who report additional heterogeneity in fuel cost valuation 
for other reasons than mileage (such as discounting and forecasting). We conservatively increase the variance of 
fuel cost valuation across sampled individuals by a factor of seven, by adding additional independent and normally 
distributed draws to each mileage type. This additional heterogeneity in fuel cost expectations may also impact our 
tax comparison as we assess below.

--- PAGE 21 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
213
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
vehicle lifetime to vary according to the consumer’s annual mileage (RC Logit V).23 
For all specifications, we obtain similar empirical results. We therefore focus our 
subsequent analysis on the base specification RC Logit II, but we will also provide 
robustness analysis in the counterfactuals for the other models.
Implications for Valuation of Future Fuel Cost Savings.—What do our estimates 
imply for consumers’ valuations of future fuel cost savings? To address this ques-
tion, the starting point is the coefficient ​γρ​ , which converts annual fuel costs into the 
present discounted value. It is simply the ratio of the estimated fuel cost coefficient ​
αγρ​ over the estimated price coefficient ​α​. As discussed above, we can then use the 
expression of ​ρ​ given by (4) to draw conclusions about consumers’ intertemporal 
preferences. More specifically, we follow Allcott and Wozny (2014), and assume 
a time horizon ​S​ and market interest rate ​r​ to obtain a value for ​ρ​ and retrieve the 
attention weight or future valuation parameter ​γ​ : this measures the extent to which 
consumers undervalue (​γ  <  1​) or overvalue the future (​γ  >  1​). Alternatively, as 
in Hausman (1979), we can set ​γ  =  1​ and assume a time horizon ​S​ to retrieve the 
consumers’ implicit interest rate ​r​; or we can set ​γ  =  1​ and ​r  =  0​ to retrieve the 
consumers’ required payback time.
Panel C of Table 3 compares the findings for the three different demand models. 
To compute ​γ​ , we set ​r  =  6 percent​ as in Allcott and Wozny (2014) and assume a 
time horizon ​S  =  15​ (at the higher end of Eurostat estimates of expected vehicle 
life between ​S  =  10​ and ​S  =  15​). Setting a relatively low value ​r  =  6 percent​ 
and a relatively high value ​S  =  15​ makes it more likely to find undervaluation of 
future payoffs; online Appendix Table B.4 presents estimated ​γ​ for a broader range 
of ​r  =  0, 3, 6, 10 percent​ and ​S  =  10, 15​.24
The logit model implies that ​γρ  =  8.63​ , which is precisely estimated with 
a standard error of 0.55. Setting ​γ  =  1​ and ​r  =  0​ , this can be interpreted as a 
required payback time of 8.63 years for an investment in a more fuel efficient car. 
Equivalently, using the above values of ​r​ and ​S​ , the implied attention weight param-
eter is ​γ  =  0.89​ , which implies a moderate undervaluation of future fuel cost sav-
ings. Finally, setting ​γ  =  1​ , our estimates imply the consumers’ implicit interest 
rate is 7.9 percent when they use a time horizon ​S  =  15​ , and it is 2.8 percent when 
they use ​S  =  10​.
The random coefficients logit model with only mileage heterogeneity implies 
slightly more undervaluation: the required payback time (​γρ​) is ​7.47​ years, which 
corresponds to an attention weight parameter of ​γ  =  0.77​ and implicit interest rates 
in the range of 10.3 percent (​S  =  15​) and 5.7 percent (​S  =  10​).
23 We assume a vehicle’s maximum lifetime distance is ​β​ max​  =  250,000​ km, so that the vehicle lifetime of 
individual ​i​ is ​S​i​  =  ​β​ max​/​β​ i​ m​ (up to the nearest integer). Furthermore, we assume a scrapping rate ​ψ​s​ in year ​s​ 
(based on table 1 of Jacobsen and van Benthem 2015) and setting ​ψ​20​  =  1​). The present value of fuel costs over 
a car’s lifetime then becomes:
​​G​ijk​ =  ​ ∑ 
s=1
​ 
​S​i​
 ​ ​(1 + r )​ −s​(1 − ​ψ​s​)​ ​β​ i​ m​ ​e​jk​ ​g​ks​ .​ 
24 Allcott and Wozny (2014) uses a richer model for vehicle life, allowing for an annual depreciation rate. In 
principle, we could also adopt such an approach, but this would make the expressions less transparent and make 
the model more difficult to estimate. It is in any case not clear whether consumers are sufficiently sophisticated to 
incorporate all this information.

--- PAGE 22 ---
214	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
Finally, the full model, which also allows for heterogeneity in the valuation of 
other product characteristics, results in a coefficient of ​γρ  =  8.84​ , so that the atten-
tion weight parameter is ​γ  =  0.91​. This again implies some moderate (but statisti-
cally insignificant) undervaluation of future fuel cost savings.
In all models, the consumer surplus losses per vehicle from mis-optimization are 
small: €73 in the first model, €328 in the second model, and €40 in the third model. 
Note that this type of low undervaluation may be interpreted as rational inattention 
from the consumers’ point of view, if it is costly to compute future fuel savings 
exactly; see Sallee (2014).
In sum, we find only moderate undervaluation with an attention weight of ​
γ  =  0.91​ for European consumers. This is similar to Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer 
(2013), and higher than the ​γ ​ = 0.76 obtained by Allcott and Wozny (2014). As 
such, the European car market shows only very limited evidence for an “energy 
paradox,” according to which consumers are puzzlingly slow in investing in energy 
efficiency (Jaffe and Stavins 1994). A possible explanation is the rather high fuel 
prices in Europe, which makes it more profitable for consumers to pay attention to 
future fuel costs. Furthermore, almost every car comes with either a gasoline engine 
and a diesel engine (with a higher initial purchase price, but also lower future fuel 
costs): this makes it easier to compare products that are otherwise nearly identical 
(see, also, Verboven 2002) on the effectiveness and welfare impact of alternative tax 
policies.
V.  Policy Counterfactuals
As shown in the previous section, to obtain reliable estimates of consumers’ valu-
ations of future fuel cost savings it is important to account for consumer heterogene-
ity, both regarding their mileage and other dimensions. What do our findings imply 
for the effectiveness and the welfare impact of alternative tax policies?
As discussed in Section I, we discuss the impact of two tax policies: a fuel tax ​t​ k​ G​ 
(on gasoline and/or diesel fuel) and a product tax ​t​ k​ E​ (on a car’s fuel consumption 
​e​jk​). Both taxes are representative for a broader group of policies that governments 
can use in order to reduce externalities. A fuel tax is equivalent to a carbon tax and 
can be seen as a Pigouvian tax that directly prices the externality. A product tax 
changes the relative prices of products with different efficiencies and will have sim-
ilar effects as subsidies for efficient vehicles, feebates, or fuel economy standards.
In subsection VA, we compare the effectiveness of a fuel tax and a product tax in 
terms of their capability to reduce total fuel usage. To make this comparison, we start 
from a fuel tax increase by €0.50 per liter, which is about twice the size of the fuel 
tax of $1 per gallon often considered in several US studies. We compare this with 
a revenue-equivalent product tax per unit of fuel consumption ​e​jk​ (in L/100 km), 
i.e., a product tax that generates the same revenues as the capitalized expected reve-
nues from the fuel tax increase by €0.50.
In subsection VB, we compare the total welfare impact of the fuel tax and prod-
uct tax. We first calculate the impact of a fuel tax increase on total welfare. We then 
compare this with an externality-equivalent product tax, which reduces the external-
ity by the same amount.

--- PAGE 23 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
215
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
We mainly focus on the results for Germany in 2011, the largest country in the most 
recent year of our dataset. Computational details are given in online Appendix A.
A. Effectiveness of Fuel versus Product Taxes
In this section, we are mainly interested in the effectiveness of both taxes in terms 
of their capability to reduce total fuel usage; but to provide background information, 
we first discuss how both taxes affect the composition of new car sales and the sales-
weighted average fuel consumption (where, as discussed earlier, fuel consumption 
is the inverse of fuel economy). As an extension, we also compare the effects of 
discriminatory taxes by fuel type (gasoline versus diesel), and show how these help 
to explain the market share of diesel cars across European countries.
In Section I, we already discussed that the price sensitivity parameter ​α​i​ and the 
extent substitution to the outside good ​s​i0​ determine the general demand impact of 
both taxes, whereas the future valuation parameter ​γ​ and the extent of mileage het-
erogeneity ​β​ i​ m​ explain the differences in their impact. We now show how this can be 
translated empirically.
Effects on the Composition of New Car Sales.—To evaluate how a fuel and prod-
uct tax affect the composition of new car sales, we take into account that these taxes 
may affect car prices, assuming multiproduct Bertrand competition.25 Following 
Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995) and related literature, firms have constant mar-
ginal costs and choose prices to maximize profits over all products they produce, 
taking as given the prices set by the other firms. We use the first-order conditions 
to recover the firms’ marginal costs; the implied markups are on average around 
26 percent, which is comparable to the estimates obtained in BLP. We then compute 
the new equilibrium prices after the fuel or product tax change.26 After having com-
puted the effect of both taxes on the sales and prices of every car ​jk​ , we aggregate 
these effects to market share and price effects of four fuel consumption quartiles. 
This is similar to what Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013) reports for fuel taxes, 
based on an entirely different identification approach. Since our approach is based 
on the estimates of a structural demand model, we can report interesting additional 
information. First, we can compare the impact of a fuel tax on the market shares with 
the impact of a (revenue-equivalent) product tax. Second, we are able to compute 
the market share effects not only under the actual estimate of the future valuation 
parameter (​γ  =  0.91​), but also under alternative scenarios with full forward look-
ing behavior (​γ  =  1​) and strong consumer myopia (​γ  =  0.5​). This more detailed 
comparison provides useful background intuition to interpret the different impact of 
both taxes on the average fuel consumption of the sold cars and on total fuel usage.
Table 4 shows the tax effects by fuel consumption quartile, based on the estimates 
of the full model with heterogeneity in both mileage and in the valuation of other 
25 In online Appendix B, we show the results when car prices are not affected (as under perfect competition). 
26 With multiproduct firms, there may in principle be multiple Bertrand equilibria. We experimented with alter-
native solution methods (Newton versus fixed point iteration on the inverted first-order conditions) and starting 
values, but did not find instances of convergence to other equilibria.

--- PAGE 24 ---
216	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
product characteristics. According to panel A of Table 4, under the actual future 
valuation parameter (​γ  =  0.91​) a €0.50 fuel tax increase raises the market share 
of cars in the lowest fuel consumption quartile by 2.2 percentage points (from a 
market share of 36.6 percent to 38.8 percent). The market shares of the other fuel 
consumption quartiles all drop. In particular, the market share of cars in the highest 
fuel consumption quartile drops by 0.7 percentage points (or 12 percent). Hence, 
a fuel price increase implies a quite considerable change in the composition of car 
sales from the high to the low fuel consumption cars.27 If consumers would be fully 
forward looking (​γ  =  1​), the fuel tax increase would only have a slightly larger 
impact on the composition of car sales. Conversely, with strong consumer myopia 
(​γ  =  0.5​), the fuel tax increase would have had a smaller impact. Notice, finally, 
that the taxes have only a small impact on average car prices, implying that there is 
a high degree of tax pass-through. Because of this, the tax effects are similar under 
perfect competition, as shown in the online Appendix Table B.6.28
Panel B of Table 4 compares these findings with those of a revenue- 
equivalent product tax increase. This amounts to a tax of €699 per unit of fuel 
consumption ​e​jk​ (so this would amount to a product tax of €3,495 for a car that 
consumes 5 liters per 100 km). Under the actual estimate of ​γ  =  0.91​ , the product 
27 These numbers are somewhat lower, but still of a comparable order of magnitude as those in Busse, Knittel, 
and Zettelmeyer (2013), based on an entirely different identification approach. This may be because of a generally 
larger cost sensitivity (with respect to prices and fuel costs) in the United States, or because of a different identifi-
cation approach. 
28 The high tax pass-through may be due to the assumption of constant marginal costs or the functional form of 
the demand model. However, if pass-through would in practice be lower (say because of increasing marginal costs), 
this would likely not differ much between the fuel and product taxes, given that there is only limited undervaluation. 
Table 4—The Effect of a Fuel Tax and a Product Tax on Market Shares by Fuel Consumption 
Quartile
 ​γ  =  0.50​ 
 ​γ  =  0.91​ 
 ​γ  =  1.00​ 
Change in market share
Current
Percentage 
point
€ ​Δp​ 
Percentage 
point
€ ​Δp​ 
Percentage 
point
€ ​Δp​ 
Panel A. Fuel tax
Tax per liter
€0.50
€0.50
€0.50
Fuel consumption Q1 (lowest)
37
1.5
−15
2.2
−31
2.4
−39
Fuel consumption Q2
37
−0.3
−14
−0.4
−30
−0.5
−36
Fuel consumption Q3
20
−0.6
−15
−1.0
−29
−1.1
−32
Fuel consumption Q4 (highest)
6
−0.5
−16
−0.7
−21
−0.8
−23
Panel B. Revenue equivalent product tax
Tax per liter/100 km
€832
€699
€662
Fuel consumption Q1 (lowest)
37
3.8
−41
3.0
−37
2.9
−37
Fuel consumption Q2
37
−0.5
−47
−0.4
−44
−0.4
−43
Fuel consumption Q3
20
−1.7
−52
−1.4
−47
−1.4
−45
Fuel consumption Q4 (highest)
6
−1.5
−52
−1.2
−44
−1.1
−41
Notes: The table reports the effects of a €0.50 fuel tax and a revenue-equivalent product tax on the market shares 
and prices of new cars aggregated by quartile of fuel consumption, under Bertrand-Nash pricing. The effects are 
computed under strong consumer myopia (γ = 0.50), under the actual estimate of consumer valuation of fuel 
costs (γ = 0.91), and under full forward looking behavior (γ = 1.00), on the basis of the parameter estimates of 
RC Logit II in Table 3. The figures refer to Germany in 2011. Q1 = quartile 1; Q2 = quartile 2; Q3 = quartile 3; 
Q4 = quartile 4.

--- PAGE 25 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
217
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
tax increase has a larger effect on the composition of new car sales than the fuel tax. 
This is also the case if consumers would be fully forward looking, and even more 
strongly so under strong consumer myopia (​γ  =  0.5​).
Effects on Sales-Weighted Average Fuel Consumption and Total Fuel Usage.—
Table 5 shows how these sales composition effects translate into the sales-weighted 
average fuel consumption and the total annual fuel usage. To make a clean compar-
ison across the specifications, we set ​γ  =  1​ because for all models, ​γ​ was indeed 
close to one. In the online Appendix (Table B.7), we show the results under con-
sumer myopia (​γ  =  0.5​).
It is instructive to start with the results from the simple logit model without mile-
age and other heterogeneity (first two rows of Table 5). In this case, the fuel tax and 
the product tax have the same impact: they both improve average fuel consumption 
by 2.2 percent and reduce total fuel usage by 31.9 percent. This is as expected since 
consumers are forward looking and all have the same mileage. Note that the large 
magnitude of the total fuel usage reduction is due to an implausibly large substitu-
tion to the outside good in the simple logit model.
In the random coefficients logit with mileage heterogeneity (RC Logit I) and 
additional heterogeneity (RC Logit II), the fuel tax has a smaller impact on the 
sales-weighted average fuel consumption than the product tax. This is consistent 
with our earlier finding that a fuel tax has a smaller impact on the composition of 
new car sales than a product tax under consumer heterogeneity. More importantly, 
Table 5—The Effect of a Fuel Tax and a Product Tax on Fuel Consumption and Fuel Usage
Outside good  
percentage point change
Fuel consumption 
percent change
Fuel usage 
percent change
Logit
Fuel tax
14.06
−2.16
−31.89
Revenue equivalent product tax
14.06
−2.16
−31.89
RC Logit I—Mileage only
Fuel tax
10.78
−0.80
−38.19
Revenue equivalent product tax
7.33
−1.49
−22.97
RC Logit II
Fuel tax
5.71
−1.16
−18.13
Revenue equivalent product tax
4.84
−1.53
−12.00
RC Logit III—Extra RC on fuel cost
Fuel tax
6.53
−1.05
−20.54
Revenue equivalent product tax
5.66
−1.33
−13.76
RC Logit IV—Extra heterogeneity in fuel cost
Fuel tax
3.78
−1.85
−9.52
Revenue equivalent product tax
3.74
−1.96
−8.96
RC Logit V—Lifetime varies with miles
Fuel tax
6.23
−1.17
−16.20
Revenue equivalent product tax
5.87
−1.29
−12.78
Notes: The table reports the effect of a €0.50 fuel tax and a revenue-equivalent product tax on the share of the 
outside good, average fuel consumption, and total annual fuel usage. The simulations are based on the parameter 
estimates in Table 3 and online Appendix Table B.3. In each model, we set γ = 1, so there is no variation in under-
valuation across the different models. The figures refer to Germany in 2011.

--- PAGE 26 ---
218	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
despite the smaller impact on the cars’ average fuel consumption, the fuel tax has 
a larger impact on total fuel usage. According to RC Logit II, the fuel tax reduces 
total fuel usage by 18.1 percent, whereas a product tax only reduces total fuel usage 
by 12.0 percent. So a fuel tax reduces total fuel usage by an additional 6.1 percent. 
Intuitively, this is because the fuel tax mainly targets the high mileage consum-
ers, who are most likely to substitute to cars with a lower fuel consumption (better 
fuel economy).29 This conclusion also holds under the actual estimate of ​γ  =  0.91​ 
(instead of ​γ  =  1​). However, with stronger consumer myopia the conclusion would 
be reversed, and a product tax becomes more effective in reducing total fuel usage. 
For example, if ​γ  =  0.5​ , a product tax would reduce total fuel usage by 15.2 per-
cent, compared with a reduction by only 12.0 percent under a fuel tax (see Table B.7 
in the online Appendix).
The remaining rows of Table 5 show a sensitivity analysis, based on the estimates 
of extensions of the random coefficients models presented in online Appendix Table 
B.3: RC Logit III (extra random coefficient on fuel type), RC Logit IV (extra het-
erogeneity in fuel cost valuation for other reasons than mileage), and RC Logit V 
(vehicle lifetime varying according to consumer’s actual mileage). In all models, 
fuel taxes retain their advantage over product taxes in reducing total fuel usage. 
However, especially in RC Logit IV, the difference in impact between both taxes 
becomes less pronounced: the targeting effect is weaker because consumers do not 
only sort based on mileage but also on other factors.30
In sum, in all models where we account for mileage heterogeneity, a fuel tax 
is more effective than a product tax in reducing total fuel usage (despite the fact 
that it performs worse in improving the average fuel consumption of the sold cars). 
Intuitively, this is because a fuel tax better targets the high mileage consumers 
and consumers are sufficiently forward looking to take these future fuel taxes into 
account. A product tax would only be more effective if there would be sufficiently 
strong consumer myopia.
Effects of Discriminatory Taxes by Fuel Type.—The above counterfactuals 
compared the impact of fuel and product taxes, without discriminating between 
the fuel type. We now consider the effects of discriminatory fuel taxes. This is of 
broad interest, since countries are increasingly using fuel-specific tax policies to 
encourage the adoption of cars with alternative fuels (such as methanol). We con-
sider here the effects of discriminatory taxes toward gasoline and diesel fuel. Most 
European countries have followed such a discriminatory policy during the past 
decades, with considerably lower taxes for diesel than for gasoline fuel. A justi-
fication of this policy was the promotion of diesel cars, which have much lower ​
CO​2​ emissions. More recently, there is an increasing pressure to harmonize the 
gasoline and ­diesel fuel prices (up to the level of the gasoline fuel price), because 
29 This is confirmed from a breakdown by mileage quartile: the lowest mileage quartile reduces fuel usage by 
much less than the largest quartile (not shown in Table 5). 
30 As discussed in the online Appendix, RC Logit IV considers a conservative upper bound on the heterogeneity 
in fuel cost valuation for other reasons than mileage.

--- PAGE 27 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
219
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
of an increased awareness of the negative effects of diesel on local air quality, 
despite the lower ​CO​2​ emissions.31
Table 6 shows the effects of a €0.50 gasoline and/or diesel fuel tax for the full 
random coefficients logit model. A €0.50 gasoline fuel tax increase would increase 
the diesel market share by 13.7 percentage points. This results in a disproportionate 
reduction of gasoline fuel usage by 40.5 percent and in an increase of diesel fuel 
usage by 24.2 percent. Conversely, a €0.50 diesel fuel tax increase would reduce 
the diesel market share by 12.3 percent, which results in a disproportionate reduc-
tion of diesel fuel usage by 37.8 percent and in an increase in gasoline fuel usage 
of 27.7 percent. There is a disproportionately greater impact on fuel usage than on 
market shares because especially the high mileage consumers substitute in response 
to the taxes. As a robustness check (online Appendix Table B.8), we performed the 
same counterfactuals for RC Logit III (which includes a random coefficient for fuel 
type). We obtain similar conclusions, though the substitution between fuel types 
is lower. Finally, note that the shifts between fuel types are correspondingly much 
smaller in a logit model without mileage heterogeneity (not shown).
In sum, a discriminatory fuel tax can imply a considerable shift in usage between 
fuel types due to the presence of mileage heterogeneity. This finding may also be 
relevant for policies toward other fuels (such as methanol).
Do Discriminatory Taxes Explain the Diesel Market Share in Europe?—We now 
take a different perspective, and ask to which extent the observed discriminatory fuel 
taxes and differences in fuel consumption can explain the market share of diesel cars 
across different European countries over time. This serves as a further ­examination 
of the implications of our model and is also of independent interest in light of the 
importance of diesel cars in Europe.
Table 7 shows the results. The first three columns show the currently observed 
gaps in fuel prices and fuel consumption between gasoline and diesel cars, and the 
diesel market shares in the seven countries in 1998 and 2011. Diesel fuel was on 
average $0.50 per liter less expensive than gasoline fuel in 1998. The highest die-
sel fuel discounts applied in Belgium, France, and the Netherlands (€0.25–€0.29 
31 Miravete, Moral, and Thurk (forthcoming) stresses these negative environmental effects of diesel fuel, and 
analyzes how the favorable fuel taxation toward diesel cars in Europe may have protected European firms from 
foreign competition. 
Table 6—The Effect of a Fuel Tax on Gasoline and Diesel Separately
Fuel usage
Diesel share
All cars percentage 
change
Gasoline cars 
percent change
Diesel cars 
percent change
Percentage 
point change
Fuel tax, gasoline only
−9.7
−40.5
24.2
13.7
Fuel tax, diesel only
−3.5
27.7
−37.8
−12.3
Fuel tax, gas and diesel
−16.8
−21.8
−11.4
2.4
Notes: The table reports the effect of a discriminatory €0.50 fuel tax for gasoline and diesel cars on total fuel usage. 
The simulations are based on the parameter estimates of RC Logit II in Table 3. The figures refer to Germany in 
2011.

--- PAGE 28 ---
220	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
per liter), while there was no discount in the United Kingdom. The gap between 
the gasoline and diesel fuel price somewhat narrowed for all countries in 2011. 
Furthermore, diesel cars had a lower average fuel consumption of about 
2 L/100 km in 1998, and this advantage further improved in 2011. The lower fuel 
price and lower fuel consumption coincides with market shares for diesel cars in the 
range of 15–52 percent in 1998, and 30–75 percent in 2011.
The last three columns show how the diesel market share would change if the fuel 
price gap and fuel consumption gap were eliminated. If the price of diesel fuel would 
be harmonized to the level of gasoline fuel in 1998, the market share of diesel cars 
would have been 7–11 percent lower (with the exception of the United Kingdom, 
where there was no fuel price gap). If, in addition, the fuel consumption of diesel 
and gasoline cars would be equalized, the market share of diesel cars would have 
been an additional 5–13 percent lower. In 1998, both factors together explain about 
40 percent of the diesel market share in Belgium, the United Kingdom, and Spain, 
an even larger fraction of 53 percent in France and Italy, and 67 percent in Germany 
and the Netherlands.32 By 2011, the importance of both factors in explaining the 
diesel market share has diminished because the gap between gasoline and diesel 
fuel prices narrowed, while diesel cars further gained in popularity. Nevertheless, 
32 Note that our model explains a considerably larger part of the diesel market share than Linn (2014), who does 
not allow for heterogeneous consumer responses to fuel costs. 
Table 7—Explaining the Diesel Market Shares across Countries
Current situation
Change in diesel share: Equalization of
Fuel 
price gap
Fuel cons. 
gap
Diesel share 
percent
Fuel price 
percent
Fuel cons. 
percent
Both 
percent
Panel A. Year 1998
Belgium
−0.25
−1.91
52
−10
−11
−21
France
−0.26
−2.04
38
−11
−9
−20
Germany
−0.22
−2.35
15
−5
−5
−10
Great Britain
0.00
−2.24
15
0
−6
−6
Italy
−0.19
−2.08
21
−7
−6
−13
Netherlands
−0.29
−2.12
21
−8
−6
−14
Spain
−0.11
−1.85
51
−9
−13
−21
Panel B. Year 2011
Belgium
−0.24
−2.01
75
−4
−16
−20
France
−0.19
−1.81
69
−4
−13
−16
Germany
−0.16
−2.23
46
−4
−14
−18
Great Britain
0.04
−2.04
50
2
−14
−12
Italy
−0.13
−2.05
56
−3
−14
−18
Netherlands
−0.28
−2.22
30
−5
−12
−15
Spain
−0.07
−2.08
69
−2
−15
−17
Notes: The table reports: in the first three columns, the currently observed gaps in fuel prices and fuel consump-
tion between gasoline and diesel cars, and the diesel market shares in the seven countries of our dataset in 1998 
(panel A) and 2011 (panel B); in the last three columns, how the diesel market share would change if the fuel price 
gap and fuel consumption gap were eliminated. The simulations are based on the parameter estimates of RC Logit 
II in Table 3.

--- PAGE 29 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
221
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
­discriminatory fuel taxes and differences in fuel consumption still explain about 30 
percent of the diesel market share across countries.33
B. Welfare Effects
We now compare the welfare impact of a fuel tax and a product tax. Total welfare 
is the sum of tax revenues, consumer surplus, and the environmental externalities 
from car usage.34 Following Allcott (2013), when consumers may undervalue future 
fuel costs, consumer surplus is the sum of decision consumer surplus (the usual 
consumer surplus, at the level of the undervaluation parameter ​γ​) and belief error 
(the difference between actual and perceived spending on fuel costs); see online 
Appendix A.3 for details.
The impact of the taxes on tax revenues and on consumer surplus can be directly 
computed from our demand estimates. To compute the impact on the environmental 
externalities, we proceed as follows. First, we calculate the externality per liter of 
fuel that justifies the current fuel tax levels (based on the first-order conditions for 
welfare maximization), and we find this to be in the range of 1€ to 1.04€ per liter, 
depending on the specification.35 Next, we assume the perceived public awareness 
of the externality per liter increases, and then compare the impact of a fuel increase 
with the impact of an “externality-neutral” product tax increase, i.e., a product tax 
increase that achieves the same level of externality reduction.
Table 8 shows the results. We provide a comparison between the simple logit 
benchmark and the base specification (RC logit II), which accounts for mileage 
and other consumer heterogeneity. Panel A considers a first scenario: the impact of 
a tax increase after a general increase in the externality by €0.20 (say because of 
an increase in car congestion). In the logit model without mileage heterogeneity, a 
fuel tax and a product tax perform equally well: they would both raise welfare by 
265 million euro. There is, however, a difference in the sources behind these gains. 
Under a fuel tax, there is a larger increase in tax revenues than under a product tax 
(+1,565 million euro versus +954 million euro). But at the same time, consumers 
experience extra losses from their belief error (the so-called internality by Allcott 
2013), while these losses go down under a product tax. Intuitively, a fuel tax raises 
more tax revenues, but consumers are partly unaware of these extra taxes and the 
overall impact of both taxes is the same.
In the random coefficients model, a fuel tax performs considerably better than an 
externality neutral product tax in correcting for the increased externality: it raises total 
welfare by 186 million euro, versus only by 112 million euro for the product tax. This 
is essentially due to the much lower impact of a fuel tax on decision consumer surplus 
33 In the online Appendix (Table B.9), we show the results in an extended model with an additional random 
coefficient on fuel type (RC logit III). The results are qualitatively the same, but the magnitudes are smaller because 
consumers substitute less between fuel types. 
34 To simplify the exposition, we assume car prices are set competitively, so that there is no producer surplus. 
Our results are similar if we consider multiproduct Bertrand-Nash pricing with constant marginal costs. 
35 This is higher but of comparable order of magnitude than outside estimates of externality costs, which attempt 
to directly estimate the cost of ​CO​2​ and other emissions, congestion costs, and accident externalities. For example, 
a recent IMF report (Parry et al. 2014) estimates the total externality to be €0.58 for gasoline and €0.82 for diesel 
in Germany 2010, and €0.72 for gasoline and €0.95 for diesel in France.

--- PAGE 30 ---
222	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
(which decreases by only 3.4 billion euro versus 5.3 billion euro under a product tax) 
because a lower tax amount is required to achieve the same externality reduction when 
there is mileage heterogeneity. Intuitively, this is because fuel taxes directly target the 
high mileage consumers, while product taxes affect all consumers in the same way.
Panel B of Table 8 considers an alternative scenario: the impact of a diesel tax 
increase after an increase in the externality of diesel cars. This reflects current pol-
icy awareness that diesel cars are not less polluting than gasoline cars (in terms of ​
CO​2​ emissions), but actually are likely more polluting (because of ​NO​x​ and other 
emissions). To keep the analysis simple, we separately calculate the externality per 
usage of gasoline and diesel that rationalize the current gasoline and diesel taxation 
and then we raise the externality usage of diesel to the same level of gasoline. The 
results give a similar picture: taxing diesel fuel or diesel cars has the same impact on 
welfare in the absence of mileage heterogeneity, but taxing diesel fuel is much more 
preferable than taxing diesel cars under mileage heterogeneity.
In sum, these findings show that it is generally preferable to impose fuel taxes 
than product taxes to correct for usage externalities, even when usage demand itself 
is perfectly inelastic.
VI.  Conclusion
We have analyzed to which extent car buyers undervalue future fuel costs, and 
what this implies for the effectiveness of alternative tax policies. We specifically 
Table 8—The Welfare Effects of a Fuel Tax versus a Product Tax
Change in Mln euro:
Revenue
Consumer 
surplus
Belief error 
(internality)
Externality
Welfare
Panel A. General externality increase and corrective taxes
Logit (​γ  =  0.89​)
Fuel tax
1,565
−335
−116
2,165
265
Product tax
954
−335
496
2,165
265
RC Logit II (​γ  =  0.91​)
Fuel tax
2,246
−3,409
−234
1,584
186
Product tax
3,512
−5,294
310
1,584
112
Panel B. Diesel externality increase and corrective diesel taxes
Logit (​γ  =  0.89​)
Fuel tax
1,009
−1,389
−107
632
146
Product tax
761
−1,389
141
632
146
RC Logit II (​γ  =  0.91​)
Fuel tax
1,555
−1,547
−185
364
187
Product tax
2,579
−2,923
30
364
50
Notes: The table reports the effects of a €0.50 fuel tax and an externality-neutral product tax on welfare. Welfare 
changes are the sum of changes in tax revenues, decision consumer surplus, belief error, and the environmental 
externality. Panel A considers the effect of an increase in the price of fuel by €0.20, and an increase in the external-
ity by €0.20 above the level that justifies the current fuel tax. Panel B considers the effect of an increase in the price 
of diesel by €0.20, and an increase in the perceived externality of diesel up to the level of that justifies the current 
gasoline tax. The simulations are based on the parameter estimates of RC Logit II in Table 3. The figures refer to 
Germany in 2011.

--- PAGE 31 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
223
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
demonstrated the importance of accounting for consumer heterogeneity in car utili-
zation and other dimensions.
To estimate the demand model, we used detailed data at the level of the car model 
and engine variant for a panel of seven European countries during 1998–2011. The 
institutional features of the European car market provided a new way to identify 
consumer responses to fuel costs, because for most car models consumers can 
choose between either a gasoline or diesel engine. To empirically identify consumer 
responses to fuel costs, we thus exploit fuel price variation by fuel type (i.e., gaso-
line or diesel) across countries and over time, interacted with variation in fuel con-
sumption across products.
We find evidence of only modest undervaluation of future fuel costs. To obtain 
this estimate, it was important to account for both mileage heterogeneity and hetero-
geneity in the valuation of other car characteristics. We then draw implications for 
the effectiveness of fuel taxes versus product taxes (based on a car’s fuel consump-
tion). Despite the modest undervaluation, we find that a fuel tax is more effective 
in reducing fuel usage than a revenue-equivalent product tax on fuel consumption 
because it specifically targets the high mileage consumers to substitute to cars with 
a lower fuel consumption. Discriminatory taxes by fuel type lead to disproportion-
ately larger shifts in fuel type usage than in market shares, because they especially 
target high mileage consumers. Furthermore, we find that fuel taxes perform much 
better in terms of total welfare to achieve a same level of externality reduction.
Because our framework makes use of aggregate demand data, it can be used to 
address a variety of other environmental questions based on datasets for many coun-
tries over a long time period. In future research, it would therefore be interesting to 
apply our framework to investigate the effects of specific policies that countries have 
followed over the past years.
REFERENCES
Adamou, Adamos, Sofronis Clerides, and Theodoros Zachariadis. 2014. “Welfare Implications of Car 
Feebates: A Simulation Analysis.” Economic Journal 124 (578): F420–43.
Allcott, Hunt. 2013. “The Welfare Effects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and Calibrations from 
the Automobile Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (3): 30–66.
Allcott, Hunt, and Michael Greenstone. 2012. “Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?” Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives 26 (1): 3–28.
Allcott, Hunt, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2014. “Energy policy with externalities 
and internalities.” Journal of Public Economics 112: 72–88.
Allcott, Hunt, and Nathan Wozny. 2014. “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox.” 
Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (5): 779–95.
Alquist, Ron, Lutz Kilian, and Robert J. Vigfusson. 2013. “Forecasting the Price of Oil.” In Handbook 
of Economic Forecasting, Vol. 2A, edited by Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann, 427–507. 
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee. 2013. “What do consumers believe about 
future gasoline prices?” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 66 (3): 383–403.
Baltagi, Badi H. 1994. Econometric Analysis of Panel Data. 1st ed. Chichester, UK: John Wiley and 
Sons.
Bento, Antonio M., Lawrence H. Goulder, Mark R. Jacobsen, and Roger H. von Haefen. 2009. “Dis-
tributional and Efficiency Impacts of Increased US Gasoline Taxes.” American Economic Review 
99 (3): 667–99.
Bento, Antonio M., Shanjun Li, and Kevin Roth. 2012. “Is there an energy paradox in fuel economy? 
A note on the role of consumer heterogeneity and sorting bias.” Economics Letters 115 (1): 44–48.

--- PAGE 32 ---
224	
AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY
AUGUST 2018
Berry, Steven T. 1994. “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation.” RAND Jour-
nal of Economics 25 (2): 242–62.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium.” 
Econometrica 63 (4): 841–90.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1999. “Voluntary Export Restraints on Automobiles: 
Evaluating a Trade Policy.” American Economic Review 89 (3): 400–430.
Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. “Are Consumers Myopic? 
Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.” American Economic Review 103 (1): 220–56.
Chamberlain, Gary. 1987. “Asymptotic efficiency in estimation with conditional moment restrictions.” 
Journal of Econometrics 34 (3): 305–34.
Chugh, Randy, Maureen Cropper, and Urvashi Narain. 2011. “The cost of fuel economy in the Indian 
passenger vehicle market.” Energy Policy 39 (11): 7174–83.
Department for Transport. 2013. “National Travel Survey.” https://www.gov.uk/government/collec-
tions/national-travel-survey-statistics.
D’Haultfœuille, Xavier, Pauline Givord, and Xavier Boutin. 2014. “The Environmental Effect of Green 
Taxation: The Case of the French Bonus/Malus.” Economic Journal 124 (578): F444–80.
Feng, Ye, Don Fullerton, and Li Gan. 2013. “Vehicle choices, miles driven, and pollution policies.” 
Journal of Regulatory Economics 44 (1): 4–29.
Fullerton, Don, and Sarah E. West. 2002. “Can Taxes on Cars and on Gasoline Mimic an Unavailable 
Tax on Emissions?” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 43 (1): 135–57.
Fullerton, Don, and Sarah E. West. 2010. “Tax and Subsidy Combinations for the Control of Car Pol-
lution.” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 10 (1): Article 3.
Gillingham, Kenneth. 2012. “Selection on Anticipated Driving and the Consumer Response to Chang-
ing Gasoline Prices.” http://www.idep.eco.usi.ch/paper-gillingham-186992.pdf.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou. 1998. “The Effects of the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency Standards 
in the US.” Journal of Industrial Economics 46 (1): 1–33.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, and Rebecca Hellerstein. 2013. “A Structural Approach to Identify-
ing the Sources of Local Currency Price Stability.” Review of Economic Studies 80 (1): 175–210.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Frank Verboven. 2005. “Market integration and convergence to the Law of 
One Price: Evidence from the European car market.” Journal of International Economics 65 (1): 
49–73.
Greene, David L. 2010. How Consumers Value Fuel Economy: A Literature Review. U.S. Environmen-
tal Protection Agency. Oak Ridge, TN, March.
Grigolon, Laura, Mathias Reynaert, and Frank Verboven. 2018. “Consumer Valuation of Fuel Costs 
and Tax Policy: Evidence from the European Car Market: Dataset.” American Economic Journal: 
Economic Policy. https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20160078.
Hausman, Jerry A. 1979. “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of Energy-Us-
ing Durables.” Bell Journal of Economics 10 (1): 33–54.
Helfand, Gloria, and Ann Wolverton. 2011. “Evaluating the Consumer Response to Fuel Economy: A 
Review of the Literature.” International Review of Environmental and Resource Economics 5 (2): 
103–46.
Hughes, Jonathan E., Christopher R. Knittel, and Daniel Sperling. 2008. “Evidence of a Shift in the 
Short-Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand.” Energy Journal 29 (1): 113–34.
Huse, Cristian, and Claudio Lucinda. 2014. “The Market Impact and the Cost of Environmental Pol-
icy: Evidence from the Swedish Green Car Rebate.” Economic Journal 124 (578): F393–419.
Innes, Robert. 1996. “Regulating Automobile Pollution under Certainty, Competition, and Imperfect 
Information.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 31 (2): 219–39.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 1998–2011. Energy Prices and Taxes. Paris: Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development.
Jacobsen, Mark R. 2013. “Evaluating US Fuel Economy Standards in a Model with Producer and 
Household Heterogeneity.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (2): 148–87.
Jacobsen, Mark R., and Arthur A. van Benthem. 2015. “Vehicle Scrappage and Gasoline Policy.” 
American Economic Review 105 (3): 1312–38.
Jacobsen, Mark R., Christopher R. Knittel, James M. Sallee, and Arthur A. van Benthem. 2016. “Suf-
ficient Statistics for Imperfect Externality-Correcting Policies.” National Bureau of Economic 
Research (NBER) Working Paper 22063.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Robert N. Stavins. 1994. “The energy paradox and the diffusion of conservation 
technology.” Resource and Energy Economics 16 (2): 91–122.
Klier, Thomas, and Joshua Linn. 2010. “The Price of Gasoline and New Vehicle Fuel Economy: Evi-
dence from Monthly Sales Data.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (3): 134–53.

--- PAGE 33 ---
VOL. 10 NO. 3
225
GRIGOLON ET AL.: CONSUMER VALUATION OF FUEL COSTS AND TAX POLICY
Klier, Thomas, and Joshua Linn. 2015. “Using Taxes to Reduce Carbon Dioxide Emissions Rates 
of New Passenger Vehicles: Evidence from France, Germany, and Sweden.” American Economic 
Journal: Economic Policy 7 (1): 212–42.
Knittel, Christopher R., and Ryan Sandler. Forthcoming. “The Welfare Impact of Indirect Pigouvian 
Taxation: Evidence from Transportation.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Langer, Ashley, and Nathan H. Miller. 2013. “Automakers’ Short-Run Responses to Changing Gaso-
line Prices.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (4): 1198–1211.
Li, Shanjun, Christopher Timmins, and Roger H. von Haefen. 2009. “How Do Gasoline Prices Affect 
Fleet Fuel Economy?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (2): 113–37.
Linn, Joshua. 2014. “Explaining the Adoption of Diesel Fuel Passenger Cars in Europe.” MIT Center 
for Energy and Environment Policy Research (CEEPR) Working Paper 2014-003.
Miravete, Eugenio J., Maria J. Moral, and Jeff Thurk. Forthcoming. “Protecting the European Auto-
mobile Industry through Environmental Regulation: The Adoption of Diesel Engines.” RAND Jour-
nal of Economics.
Nevo, Aviv. 2000. “A Practitioner’s Guide to Estimation of Random-Coefficients Logit Models of 
Demand.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 9 (4): 513–48.
Parry, Ian, Dirk Heine, Eliza Lis, and Shajun Li. 2014. Getting Energy Prices Right: From Principle 
to Practice. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Petrin, Amil. 2002. “Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan.” Journal of 
Political Economy 110 (4): 705–29.
Reynaert, Mathias, and Frank Verboven. 2014. “Improving the performance of random coefficients 
demand models: The role of optimal instruments.” Journal of Econometrics 179 (1): 83–98.
Sallee, James M. 2014. “Rational Inattention and Energy Efficiency.” Journal of Law and Economics 
57 (3): 781–820.
Sallee, James M., Sarah E. West, and Wei Fan. 2016. “Do consumers recognize the value of fuel econ-
omy? Evidence from used car prices and gasoline price fluctuations.” Journal of Public Econom-
ics 135: 61–73.
Verboven, Frank. 2002. “Quality-Based Price Discrimination and Tax Incidence: Evidence from Gas-
oline and Diesel Cars.” RAND Journal of Economics 33 (2): 275–97.
