

===== [PAGE 1] =====

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DRIVE DOWN THE COST:
LEARNING BY DOING AND GOVERNMENT POLICIES IN
THE GLOBAL EV BATTERY INDUSTRY
Panle Jia Barwick
Hyuk-Soo Kwon
Shanjun Li
Nahim B. Zahur
Working Paper 33378
http://www.nber.org/papers/w33378
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2025, Revised August 2025
We thank seminar participants at Albany, Arizona State, Buffalo, Chicago, Columbia, Cornell, 
CUHK-Shenzhen, Dartmouth, Missouri, MIT, NUS, Ohio State, Peking, Penn State, Philly Fed, 
Princeton, Queen’s, Sciences Po, Stanford, Toronto, UCL, UT-Austin, Vanderbilt, Wisconsin, 
Yale, 2024 IIOC, 2025 ASSA, and 2025 NBER Energy Markets, Decarbonization and Trade as 
well as Hunt Allcott, Abhi Ananth, Steve Berry, Chris Conlon, Ying Fan, Ken Gillingham, Penny 
Goldberg, Larry Goulder, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Yizhen Gu, Phil Haile, Keith Head, Ken 
Hendricks, Kate Ho, JF Houde, Mark Jacobsen, Matt Kahn, Adam Kapor, Jakub Kastl, Michael 
Keane, Chris Knittel, Tess Lallemant, Ashley Langer, Jing Li, Ming Li, James MacKinnon, 
Thierry Mayer, Eugenio Miravete, Salvador Navarro, Aviv Nevo, Matthew Osborne, Jacquelyn 
Pless, Dave Rapson, Kevin Remmy, Mathias Reynaert, Jon Scott, Alex Shcherbachov, Jim Stock, 
Rich Sweeney, Chris Timmins, Bob Town, Min Wang, Matthijs Wildenbeest, Catherine 
Wolfram, Daniel Xu, and Junji Xiao for useful comments. Yangsai Chen, Yulian Chen, Jack 
Collison, Chenyan Gong, Jason Huang, Binglin Wang, Feiyu Wang, Yucheng Wang, Yuerong 
Wang, Haohan Wenyan, and Xin Zheng provided excellent research assistance. Barwick and Li 
acknowledge funding support from the National Science Foundation (award No. 2417173); Zahur 
acknowledges funding support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council; 
Kwon acknowledges funding support from the Energy Policy Institute at the University of 
Chicago (EPIC-China). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official NBER publications.
© 2025 by Panle Jia Barwick, Hyuk-Soo Kwon, Shanjun Li, and Nahim B. Zahur. All rights 
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit 
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.


===== [PAGE 2] =====

Drive Down the Cost: Learning by Doing and Government Policies in the Global EV Battery 
Industry
Panle Jia Barwick, Hyuk-Soo Kwon, Shanjun Li, and Nahim B. Zahur
NBER Working Paper No. 33378
January 2025, Revised August 2025
JEL No. F13, L0, L52, L62, Q48
ABSTRACT
Electric vehicle (EV) battery costs have declined by more than 90% over the past decade. This study 
investigates the role of learning-by-doing (LBD) in driving this reduction and its interaction with 
two major government policies – consumer EV subsidies and local content requirements. 
Leveraging rich data on EV models and battery suppliers, we develop and estimate a structural 
model of the global EV industry that incorporates heterogeneous consumer choices and strategic 
pricing behaviors of EV producers and battery suppliers. The model allows us to recover battery 
costs for each EV model and quantify the extent of LBD in battery production. The learning rate is 
estimated to be 9.2% during our sample period after controlling for industry technological 
progress, economies of scale, input costs, and EV assembly experience. LBD magnifies the 
effectiveness of consumer EV subsidies and drives cross-country spillovers from these subsidies. 
Upstream battery suppliers capture only a minor share of LBD’s economic benefits, and consumer 
EV subsidies correct for the under-provision of learning and improve social welfare. China’s local 
content requirement helps domestic suppliers gain a competitive advantage at the cost of consumers 
and foreign suppliers, but would have harmed domestic welfare if delayed by five years.
Panle Jia Barwick
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Department of Economics
and CEPR
and also NBER
panle.barwick@gmail.com
Hyuk-Soo Kwon
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
hskwon.econ@gmail.com
Shanjun Li
Cornell University
Department of Economics
and NBER
SL2448@cornell.edu
Nahim B. Zahur
Queen's University
nahimzahur@gmail.com


===== [PAGE 3] =====

1
Introduction
The electrification of passenger transportation through the widespread adoption of electric vehi-
cles (EVs) alongside the transition to a cleaner electricity grid is a crucial strategy to mitigate
climate change. To achieve these goals, many countries have set ambitious targets for transporta-
tion electrification and implemented policies to promote EV adoption. Historically, the high price
of EVs, primarily driven by expensive lithium-ion EV batteries, constituted a major barrier to
widespread adoption. Between 2010 and 2020, EV battery costs fell by nearly 90% (Bloomberg
NEF, 2023). Industry experts attributed this substantial cost reduction largely to learning-by-doing
(LBD), where production experience reduces unit production costs through lower scrap rates and
improved efficiency.1 At the same time, factors such as technological progress and increasing
production scale might also have contributed to this dramatic decline in costs.
Despite the importance of declining battery costs for the diffusion of EV technology, credible
causal evidence on the size and nature of LBD remains scarce, and our understanding of how LBD
interacts with various government policies in the EV industry is limited. This paper aims to address
these gaps by: a) quantifying LBD and its contribution to the observed reduction in EV battery costs
over time, and b) assessing how LBD interacts with two prominent classes of government policies –
consumer subsidies and local content requirements – in shaping domestic and global EV diffusion,
market share dynamics, and social welfare.
Quantifying LBD is crucial for understanding the broad impacts of these policies. First, EV
consumer subsidies have been widely adopted worldwide and amounted to $43 billion in 2022
(International Energy Agency, 2023). For example, the U.S. Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) of
2022 offers up to $7,500 per qualifying EV purchase, while China provided generous EV subsidies
between 2010 and 2022. LBD creates a positive feedback loop: subsidies drive higher EV adoption,
which increases production experience in battery manufacturing. This accumulated experience, in
turn, fuels LBD that reduces battery costs and EV prices, further boosting adoption and amplifying
the direct effects of subsidies.
Second, the preferential treatment of domestic battery producers has become part of a growing
spectrum of industrial policies in recent years. During 2016-2019, China implemented a whitelist
policy that restricted EV subsidies to vehicles using batteries from government-approved (domes-
tic) producers. Similarly, to qualify for consumer subsidies, the U.S. IRA mandates EV models
to source a certain fraction (in terms of value) of critical minerals and battery components from
1Theodore Wright, an aeronautical engineer, was among the first to attribute the observed decline in the labor require-
ment for airplane manufacturing to “learning by doing” (Wright, 1936). Wright’s Law has since been widely used
to describe the reduction in unit production cost as a function of cumulative manufacturing experience in numerous
industries, including lithium-ion batteries (Bhutad, 2021; Ritchie, 2021; Walter et al., 2023).
1


===== [PAGE 4] =====

firms in North America or free-trade agreement partner countries. Likewise, the EU-UK Trade
and Cooperation Agreement includes enhanced local content requirements for EV batteries that are
expected to come into effect in 2027. The broad implications of local content requirements hinge
crucially on the size and scope of LBD. If LBD predominantly occurs within firms (i.e., internal
LBD) and concentrates among industry leaders, these policies could accelerate LBD by consoli-
dating production to a smaller set of firms. This would result in reduced EV battery costs but may
come at the cost of increased market concentration. Conversely, if policies across countries erect
regional barriers and redirect production toward domestic (and potentially less efficient) producers,
they might slow down global LBD and hinder the penetration of EVs. The overall impact on both
domestic and global EV adoption is ambiguous and necessitates empirical investigation.
Third, the battery supply network is global, with EV producers worldwide sourcing primar-
ily from battery suppliers concentrated in China, Japan, and South Korea. The global nature of the
supply network, an increasingly common phenomenon in many industries, implies that policies im-
plemented in one country can create cross-border spillovers and generate repercussions extending
well beyond country borders. Consequently, a global analysis that explicitly accounts for foreign
LBD is essential to accurately evaluate policy implications.
This paper takes advantage of a comprehensive database on the global EV and battery industries
that has three key components. The first dataset consists of annual EV sales from 2013 to 2020 in
thirteen countries, which collectively accounted for over 95% of global EV sales. The data report
vehicle sales, and vehicle and battery attributes by model by country for both battery EVs (BEVs)
and plug-in hybrid EVs (PHEVs). The second data set contains information on battery suppliers,
including plant location and, crucially, the list of EV models supplied. The third dataset contains
financial incentives for EV purchases in each country over time. In addition, we have also collected
socioeconomic variables and household surveys on vehicle ownership across countries.
Estimating the magnitude of LBD entails addressing two key challenges. First, we do not ob-
serve systematic data on battery costs at the vehicle-model level, which are proprietary in nature. To
address this challenge, we develop a framework of price-setting behaviors of battery suppliers and
EV producers to infer upstream and downstream markups. This allows us to recover battery costs
based on observed vehicle prices and estimated demand elasticity. To examine the robustness of
our results, we estimate a variety of pricing models, including simultaneous vs. sequential Nash-in-
Nash Bargaining, linear pricing, with and without incorporating battery suppliers’ forward-looking
behavior. We also validate our battery cost estimates using industry reports and trade data.
Second, firm experience (i.e., cumulative production) that underlies LBD is potentially endoge-
nous and correlated with unobserved marginal cost shocks in battery production. For example, effi-
2


===== [PAGE 5] =====

cient firms with favorable cost shocks are more likely to sell a large quantity and accumulate more
experience. We construct an IV for battery supplier experience by leveraging demand shifters. The
IV exploits differences in suppliers’ exposure to downstream EV subsidies, which vary over time
and across vehicle models sold in different countries. The intuition is that suppliers selling batteries
to countries with more generous EV subsidies will accumulate experience faster than those selling
in markets with lower subsidies. If LBD effects are present, battery costs for the former suppliers
will decline more rapidly than for the latter group, ceteris paribus. Our IV also exploits the shock
of China’s whitelist policy, which generated exogenous variation in production experience across
battery suppliers.
Our empirical analysis delivers five key findings. First, the learning rate is estimated to be
9.2% after controlling for technological advancements, experience in EV assembly, input costs,
and economies of scale. This implies that doubling battery production experience would reduce
unit production costs by 9.2%. Although this learning rate is at the lower end of estimates reported
across industries (e.g., Argote and Epple, 1990; Irwin and Klenow, 1994; Ziegler and Trancik,
2021; Covert and Sweeney, 2022), LBD alone accounted for a sizable 42.0% of the overall decline
in battery costs from 2013 to 2020. Industry-wide technological progress was responsible for
an additional 33.9% of the cost reduction, with the remainder explained by changes in battery
chemistry, input cost fluctuations, and economies of scale. These results are robust across different
supply-side models we estimate. In particular, allowing battery suppliers to be forward-looking
yields estimates similar to those from our baseline static framework. The estimates also remain
stable when we control for firm innovation.
Second, upstream LBD creates significant externalities along the supply chain, with upstream
firms capturing only a small fraction of the associated economic benefits due to the oligopolistic na-
ture of the supply chain. Our simulations indicate that CATL, the leading battery supplier in China,
captures 25.2% of the total surplus generated by its increased LBD, while Panasonic, the largest
battery supplier in Japan, captures 32.9%. These results align with findings from the theoretical
literature on LBD that firms with market power tend to learn too little relative to the social opti-
mum (see Thompson (2010) for a review). Because some of the gains from LBD are passed on to
consumers through lower prices, monopolists have weaker incentives to reduce costs than a social
planner – an instance of the “Arrow effect” (Arrow, 1962). Consequently, government subsidies
can help address the under-provision of LBD and enhance social welfare, as we show below.
Third, LBD greatly amplifies the sales impact of EV subsidies through positive feedback loops.
In the absence of LBD, subsidies across countries are estimated to increase cumulative global EV
sales by 27.9% during the sample period, consistent with existing studies (Springel, 2019; Li et al.,
3


===== [PAGE 6] =====

2021) that focus on the short-term effects of EV purchase subsidies. When both consumer subsidies
and LBD were in effect, global EV sales surged by 204% relative to the baseline with neither
subsidies nor LBD. This combined effect is 66% greater than the sum of their individual effects,
highlighting their strong complementarity. These findings underscore the critical importance of
accounting for LBD when evaluating the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of government policies
designed to promote EV adoption. Ignoring LBD would lead to a substantial underestimation of
the long-term benefits of such policies.
Fourth, consumer EV subsidies in one country generate global spillovers through LBD in bat-
tery production, but the magnitude of these spillovers hinges critically on the nature of the supply
chain network and trade patterns. For example, the estimated $14.05 billion in U.S. subsidies
generated $19.7 billion in global welfare gains, measured as the sum of consumer surplus and firm
profit on the global scale, net of subsidy expenditure. The U.S. (and Canada) captured 49% of these
welfare gains, as the interaction between subsidies and LBD significantly reduced battery costs for
domestic EV producers and lowered vehicle prices for domestic consumers. Battery suppliers in
Japan and South Korea captured 37% of the global welfare gains, and Europe also benefited sig-
nificantly. In contrast, China captured only 2%, driven by its limited trade in EVs and EV batteries
with foreign countries during our sample period.
In a similar manner, European governments invested $18.44 billion in EV purchase subsidies,
resulting in $14.17 billion in global welfare gains, of which only 21% were captured by the EU.
This relatively low capture rate is driven by Europe’s higher import share of EVs and the widespread
use of uniform subsidies, the latter of which are less effective in boosting consumer surplus com-
pared to the battery capacity-based subsidies in the U.S. (Barwick, Kwon, and Li, 2024). In con-
trast, China captured 92.5% of the global welfare gains from its subsidies due to China’s limited
EV imports and the fact that the majority of its EV producers source batteries domestically.
Lastly, China’s whitelist policy benefited domestic battery suppliers at a cost to other countries.
The EU, Japan and South Korea, and the U.S. and Canada collectively incurred $7.65 billion in
welfare losses. This was driven by a shift in global battery production from more efficient Japanese
and South Korean battery suppliers to (at the time) higher-cost Chinese suppliers. Within China,
while battery suppliers reaped gains, consumers bore the burden of higher EV prices, and EV firms
initially suffered but eventually gained from faster domestic LBD as the whitelist policy facilitated
sales concentration in top domestic suppliers. China’s whitelist was introduced at a strategically
favorable time when the learning curve for battery production was steep. Had the whitelist policy
been delayed to 2021-2024, China would have faced net losses, as consumer welfare losses would
have outweighed the gains to battery suppliers. The negative impact on other countries would have
4


===== [PAGE 7] =====

been smaller. These results highlight the important trade-offs inherent in protective policies that
distort market forces. We believe that our analyses offer valuable insights into the implications of
the U.S. IRA and local content requirements considered in other countries.
Our study is related to several strands of literature. First, it adds to the growing literature
on the adoption of EVs (Li et al., 2017; Li, 2023; Springel, 2019; Muehlegger and Rapson, 2022;
Remmy, 2022; Barwick, Kwon, and Li, 2024). While these studies focus on understanding demand
responses to consumer subsidies and the role of charging infrastructure, they do not account for
LBD in the EV battery industry or the resulting feedback loop between reduced battery production
costs and increased EV demand. Consequently, these studies may underestimate the impacts and
cost-effectiveness of consumer subsidies and other supportive policies on EV adoption. Our study
is the first in the literature to quantify LBD in the global EV battery industry and take it into account
when assessing the broad impacts of EV policies. The results highlight that ignoring LBD would
significantly underestimate the impact of supportive government policies on EV adoption.
Second, this study contributes to the empirical literature on LBD that has been documented in
a variety of industries (Argote and Epple, 1990; Head, 1994; Irwin and Klenow, 1994; Benkard,
2000; Thompson, 2001; Thornton and Thompson, 2001; Benkard, 2004; Ohashi, 2005; Covert and
Sweeney, 2022). Except for Covert and Sweeney (2022), all the studies cited above benefited from
data on input requirements or costs associated with producing a product, but these data are often
hard to obtain due to their proprietary nature. Our study develops a new methodology for estimating
LBD without data on inputs or production costs. It exploits variations in prices and quantities of
the final products (i.e., EVs) and information on the vertical links between final good producers
and intermediate input suppliers. Our methodology could be advantageous in contexts without
proprietary cost data.
Third, this paper contributes to the emerging literature that highlights the significant role of
recent industrial and trade policies in the development and diffusion of new energy technologies
such as EVs and solar panels (Allcott et al., 2024; Bollinger et al., 2024; Banares-Sanchez et al.,
2024; Gerarden, 2023; Head et al., 2024; Wang and Xing, 2024). Our work is also related to
Goldberg et al. (2024), which examines the role of industrial policies in the presence of LBD in
the global semiconductor industry. We add to this literature by quantifying the size and scope of
LBD in the upstream sector and evaluating its interactions with prominent industrial policies in the
downstream sector. More importantly, our findings underscore that learning in the upstream sector
not only provides a rationale for supportive policies, such as subsidies in the downstream sector,
but also amplifies the impact of these policies on technology adoption and social welfare.
Lastly, this paper is related to studies that analyze vertical relationships between upstream (in-
5


===== [PAGE 8] =====

put) suppliers and downstream producers (Horn and Wolinsky, 1988; Chipty and Snyder, 1999;
Crawford and Yurukoglu, 2012; Grennan, 2013; Gowrisankaran, Nevo, and Town, 2015; Ho and
Lee, 2017; Fan and Yang, 2020). Our analysis builds on the methodology in these papers and
develops a framework that leverages the vertical relationships to study LBD among the upstream
suppliers. We explore and estimate a variety of vertical models and verify the robustness of our
LBD estimate across different modeling assumptions. We also extend the existing vertical litera-
ture by incorporating forward-looking considerations in an alternative bargaining model.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of battery
production and presents descriptive evidence on LBD. Section 3 introduces the demand model and
outlines four alternative supply-side specifications. Sections 4 and 5 discuss estimation challenges,
describe our solutions, and present the empirical results. Section 6 quantifies the welfare effects of
major EV policies with and without LBD. Section 7 concludes.
2
Data and Descriptive Evidence
2.1
Battery Primer and Sources of LBD
This section provides a primer on EV batteries and discuss how LBD arises in the battery production
process. BEVs and PHEVs use lithium-ion batteries, which feature lithium as one of the key
minerals in cathodes and graphite as the primary material in anodes. The chemical composition of
the cathode is a major determinant of battery performance. There are three main types of lithium-
ion batteries based on cathode chemistries: NMC (Nickel Manganese Cobalt), NCA (Nickel Cobalt
Aluminum), and LFP (Lithium Iron Phosphate).2
Battery packs used in EVs consist of multiple interconnected modules, each made up of tens
to hundreds of interconnected battery cells, which account for 70-80% of the battery pack’s cost
(Bloomberg NEF, 2023). The mass production process of battery cells involves three stages, each
comprising many small steps: electrode production, cell assembly, and cell finishing. Cell produc-
tion has at least three key features that could contribute to LBD. First, the production process is
highly complex and governed by hundreds of tuning parameters. The interconnected system needs
to be constantly fine-tuned and optimized to achieve efficiency. Second, battery cell manufacturing
is very sensitive to material purity and requires stringent clean-room standards. Tiny amounts of
2NMC batteries, favored by American and European automakers, offer higher energy density but are more expensive
due to costly manganese and cobalt. NCA batteries are mainly used by Tesla and sourced from Panasonic. Chinese
automakers, like BYD, prefer LFP batteries for their lower cost and thermal stability. In 2020, NMC, NCA, and LFP
batteries held 71%, 21%, and 6% of the global market share, respectively (International Energy Agency, 2021). By
2023, LFP’s share surged to 40% globally due to its cost advantage, while NCA’s share fell to 8%.
6


===== [PAGE 9] =====

impurities can cause high scrap and low yield rates.3 Third, the industry has been undergoing con-
tinuous technological advances in new chemistry composition and production techniques, which
have important implications for production costs. Taken together, these features, corroborated by
our field visits to battery manufacturers, indicate that the production know-how accumulated by
managers, engineers, and workers through experience enhances production efficiency and reduces
scrap rates, thereby lowering unit costs.4
2.2
Data Description
The empirical analysis relies on several rich datasets on global EV and EV battery industries.
EV Sales and Attributes
The first dataset, sourced from EV Volumes and IHS Markit, contains
annual EV sales and vehicle prices and attributes by model for each of the 13 countries that reported
the largest EV sales from 2013 to 2020. These countries collectively accounted for 95% of global
EV sales during the sample period.5 Appendix Figure A1 shows the trend in EV sales by coun-
try/region in Panel (a) and the market share of EVs in the new vehicle market as well as the target
for zero-emission-vehicles (ZEVs, which are primarily EVs) by country-year in Panel (b). Since
the introduction of mass-market EV models in 2010, worldwide passenger EV sales have grown to
14.2 million units or 18.5% of the passenger vehicle market in 2023. There is high variation in EV
penetration across countries. China became the largest EV market in 2015 and accounted for 59%
of global new EV sales in 2023. In terms of EV’s market share in the new vehicle market, Norway
has by far the highest share of 90.4% in 2023, while it was 34% in China, 21.4% in Europe, and
9.4% in the US, respectively.
Battery Suppliers
The second dataset from EV Volumes contains information on battery char-
acteristics for each EV model (e.g., battery capacity and battery chemistry) and, crucially, the
identity of battery suppliers. This data set allows us to establish vertical relationships between
upstream battery suppliers and downstream EV producers. We construct the experience variable
(i.e., cumulative past production) for each battery supplier in each year based on the vertical supply
relationships and data on EV sales. We also collected data on the production plants owned by each
battery supplier, including production capacity, start-up year, and plant location (see Appendix A).
3Even industry leaders face challenges with high scrap rates. Tesla and Panasonic’s Nevada Gigafactory, launched
in 2017, initially had a scrap rate of 80–90%, which took years to reduce to 15%.
Source: https://www.
autoweek.com/news/a46628833/early-production-battery-plant-scrap-rates/#.
4A 2018 report by Boston Consulting Group indicates that the most common challenges in battery production have
to do with yield/scrap rate and efficiency/process time. Engineers need to rely on experience, rather than physical
correlations, to adjust parameters in order to optimize the production process (Küpper et al., 2018).
5The 13 countries are Austria, Canada, China, France, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzer-
land, the UK, and the US.
7


===== [PAGE 10] =====

Panels (a) and (b) of Figure A2 present the supply network in 2013 and 2020, respectively.
The left side of the figure displays the top six battery producers, while the right side reports the
eight largest EV producers. The thickness of the lines represents the battery sales volume in units.
Both battery production and EV manufacturing are concentrated, illustrating a bilateral oligopoly
market structure. In addition, EV producers often source from multiple battery suppliers, and
battery suppliers sell to multiple EV producers. The only exceptions are BYD and AESC, which
are vertically integrated firms in our sample period.6 However, for any given EV model sold in a
particular country, once a battery supplier has been chosen, it is rare for the EV producer to switch
to a different supplier: only 4.3% of EV models switch battery suppliers. These features inform
our use of a bargaining model to characterize the vertical relationships in this industry.
EV Incentives
The third data set contains financial incentives for EV buyers at the country, year,
and model level as discussed in Barwick et al. (2023). There are a variety of financial incentives,
including direct consumer subsidies, acquisition tax credits, and ownership tax credits. For consis-
tency across countries, we focus on EV incentives offered by the central government.7 Subsidies for
EV purchases vary across countries and over time. In addition, there is considerable cross-model
variation within a given country and year because the subsidy amount is often based on vehicle
attributes. For example, subsidies in the U.S. are based on an EV’s battery capacity, with a mini-
mum capacity of four kWh and a maximum subsidy of $7500.8 EV subsidies in China are based
on vehicle driving range with a notched design (Barwick, Kwon, and Li, 2024). These wedges in
EV subsidies serve as a crucial source of exogenous variation in the experience of different battery
suppliers: those supplying to EV models eligible for more generous subsidies would sell more units
and gain experience faster.
Figure A3 reports the average EV subsidy (from the central government) by country during
2013-2020 in Panel (a) and the subsidy schedule over time in China in Panel (b). Norway has the
most generous subsidies, consistent with its high penetration of EVs. China’s subsidy was reduced
over time and eventually phased out in 2022.
Auxiliary Data
We exploit several pieces of auxiliary data. First, we collect socioeconomic
variables and annual gasoline prices by country from the World Bank and annual income statistics
6BYD produced batteries for its own EVs and AESC only produced batteries for the Renault-Nissan-Mitsubishi al-
liance. These vertically integrated firms accounted for 14.5% of sales in our sample.
7EV subsidies were not offered at the central level in Canada and Switzerland. For Canada, we construct a population-
weighted average based on subsidies offered by British Columbia, Quebec, and Ontario. For Switzerland, we construct
a population-weighted average based on tax credits offered by the cantons of Zurich, Lausanne, Basel, Bern, and
Geneva.
8The subsidy amount was $2500+$415*(capacity-4) but phased out following a pre-set schedule when sales of an EV
model hit 200,000 (Lohawala, 2023). The subsidy policy was extended by the U.S. IRA in 2023.
8


===== [PAGE 11] =====

by country from the World Inequality Database (https://wid.world/). Second, to facilitate
demand estimation, we leverage household surveys on new vehicle buyers for China during 2016-
2020 and for the U.S. in 2018 (Liang and Xiao, 2024; Leard, Linn, and Springel, 2024). Third,
we obtain export data of lithium-ion batteries and annual import prices of key minerals for battery
production by country, including lithium carbonates, lithium oxides, manganese oxides, cobalt
oxides, and nickel oxides from the UN Comtrade database, as well as mineral prices from the annual
Mineral Commodity Summaries published by the U.S. Geological Survey. Finally, to capture firm-
level innovation, we compile information on the number of patents filed by battery suppliers during
2008-2020 from the European Patent Office (EPO)’s global PATSTAT database (see Barwick et al.
(2024) for the detailed data construction procedure).
2.3
Descriptive Evidence
Table 1 presents summary statistics for key variables used in the analysis. During the sample period,
the average price of a BEV model was $45,000, supported by an average subsidy of $4,700 per unit.
PHEV models had a higher average price of $72,000 and a lower average subsidy of $1,900. The
average driving range of BEVs increased significantly from 105 km in 2013 to 206 km in 2020,
with an overall average of 171 km, alongside an increase in average battery capacity from 30 kWh
to 50 kWh (with an average of 42 kWh). In contrast, PHEVs had a much shorter average driving
range of 31 km and an average battery capacity of 11.5 kWh, showing only modest improvements
over the same period.
The estimation of LBD is fundamentally informed by the relationship between production ex-
perience and battery costs. In the absence of detailed micro-level transaction data between battery
suppliers and EV firms (which are commercial secrets), we examine the correlation between vehi-
cle prices – of which battery costs constitute a significant share – and the production experience
of battery suppliers in Figure 1. We use vehicle prices to construct a proxy for battery costs by
partialling out vehicle attributes such as horsepower, size, a PHEV dummy, along with a rich set
of country, brand, and year fixed effects. Panel (a) illustrates changes in these price residuals di-
vided by battery capacity over time. The blue dots represent the sales-weighted average annual
price residuals per kWh, a proxy for unit battery costs. These residuals exhibit a substantial decline
from 2014 to 2020, closely matching the trend in battery costs reported by Bloomberg NEF (2023),
shown as red diamonds.9
Panel (b) of Figure 1 presents a binned scatter plot of price residuals, where each observation
9The Bloomberg costs are based on 303 survey data points on battery prices for passenger cars, buses, commercial
vehicles, and stationary storage. While the overall trend from Bloomberg NEF (2023) is informative, our analysis
focuses on lithium-ion batteries for passenger EVs.
9


===== [PAGE 12] =====

corresponds to a country-year-model. The figure reveals a strong negative relationship between
price residuals and supplier experience, indicating that EV models supplied by more experienced
battery suppliers tend to have lower prices. Moreover, the figure highlights that production experi-
ence increases with cumulative subsidies received by the battery supplier (as reflected by the size
of the dots), motivating a key IV strategy for identifying LBD.
From January 2016 to June 2019, China implemented a whitelist policy requiring EV models to
use batteries from government-approved “whitelist” producers – all of which were Chinese firms –
to qualify for subsidies.10 Figure 2 provides suggestive evidence of this policy’s impacts. Panel (a)
depicts the share of EV models sourcing batteries from Chinese suppliers, distinguishing between
those sold in China (solid red line, left y-axis) and outside China (dashed blue line, right y-axis). As
intended by the policy, the share of EV models sold in China that sourced batteries from Chinese
suppliers rose from below 70% in 2016 to nearly 90% in 2019, then declined after the policy was
scrapped.
During the data period of 2013-2020, six major battery suppliers dominated the market: two
Chinese firms (BYD and CATL), two Japanese firms (AESC and Panasonic), and two South Korean
firms (LG and Samsung). Panel (b) shows that during the whitelist period, sales of BYD and CATL
– China’s largest battery suppliers on the whitelist – expanded far more rapidly than those of the
top four non-Chinese suppliers. The impact of this growth in experience is also evident in Panel
(a): for EV models sold outside China, the share of models that sourced batteries from Chinese
firms was near zero in 2016, rose to 4% by 2019, and surged to 11% by 2020. This sharp increase
reflects the substantial cost reductions achieved by Chinese battery producers, consistent with their
steep export price declines as shown in the UN Comtrade data in Figure 3.
While the descriptive evidence presented above aligns with learning-by-doing (LBD) as a driv-
ing force behind cost reductions, other confounding factors, such as technological advancements,
changes in battery chemistry and input costs, and experience in EV assembly, may also play a role.
We account for these potential confounding factors and employ an IV strategy for quantifying the
magnitude of LBD below.
3
Model
We develop a structural model that allows us to infer battery costs based on observed EV prices,
sales, and the time-varying vertical relationships between EV producers and battery suppliers. The
model features EV purchase decisions by heterogeneous consumers and price-setting behaviors of
10This policy raised significant concerns about China’s compliance with WTO rules, particularly under the Agreement
on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (SCM Agreement). Although no formal WTO case was filed, China
withdrew the policy in 2019 amid widespread criticism from foreign firms and governments (USTR, 2019).
10


===== [PAGE 13] =====

EV producers and battery suppliers. We use the following notation throughout: 1) EV producer v,
producing a set of vehicles Ωv; 2) battery supplier b, supplying batteries for a set of vehicles Ωb;
3) consumer i, considering whether to buy vehicle model j in country c at time (year) t; 4) vehicle
retail price before subsidies pjct, unit sales q jct, consumer subsidy φjct, and battery price τjct. Bold
terms denote vectors (or matrices).
To set the stage for the structural model, we decompose the retail price of an EV as:
pjct =
mcb
jct
| {z }
Battery cost
+
mcv
jct
| {z }
Non-battery EV cost
+
mkb
jct
| {z }
Battery markup
+ mkv
jct
| {z }
EV markup
,
(1)
where mcb
jct is the cost of the battery and mcv
jct denotes the non-battery portion of the EV’s produc-
tion cost. Battery supplier b’s markup is denoted by mkb
jct and EV producer v’s markup is mkv
jct.
We quantify the upstream and downstream markups by characterizing the price-setting behaviors
of battery suppliers and EV producers. Subtracting these markups from EV prices recovers the pro-
duction costs of batteries and EVs. Given appropriate instruments that capture exogenous variation
in battery suppliers’ experience, these cost estimates enable us to estimate LBD. We outline the key
model elements below and discuss the estimation strategy in Section 4.
3.1
EV Demand and Downstream Markups
Consumer Demand
EV demand is characterized by a random coefficients discrete choice model
following Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995). In each period t, consumer i in county c chooses
among the available EV models, as well as an outside option. Consumer i’s utility from buying
vehicle j is:
Uijct = αi(p jct −φ jct)+X jctβi +ξjct +εi jct.
(2)
Consumers pay the post-subsidy price, which is the retail price pjct net of the consumer subsidy
φ jct offered by the central government. The vector Xjct includes observed vehicle attributes, such
as vehicle size, driving range, horsepower, a PHEV dummy, as well as a rich set of fixed effects,
including market (country-by-year), brand (e.g., Tesla), and body type (i.e., sedan, SUV, and van)
fixed effects. Following Goldberg and Verboven (2001), we use a home product dummy to capture
home bias, which equals one if the EV model is produced by an automaker with headquarters in the
same country as the consumer. We allow preference parameters on price and vehicle attributes, αi
and β i, to vary across consumers. ξjct represents unobserved product quality and demand shocks,
which render the price variable endogenous. εi jct denotes i.i.d. preference shocks with the Type-I
Extreme Value distribution.
Downstream Markups
The downstream markup mkv
jct is determined through Bertrand-Nash
competition and is recovered after estimating demand, following the standard practice in the lit-
11


===== [PAGE 14] =====

erature. Specifically, automaker v (or Original Equipment Manufacturer, OEM) chooses EV prices
to maximize variable profits from selling different vehicles in a country-year (suppressing country
and time indices):11
πv(p) = ∑
j∈Ωv
(p j −τj −mcv
j)q j(p,φ),
where τj is the battery price for vehicle j (paid by firm v to its supplier), mcv
j is firm v’s marginal
cost of producing non-battery components, and p j −τ j −mcv
j is the per-unit markup. The vector
p denotes prices for all EVs in the market. The first order condition (FOC) with respect to vehicle
price pj is given by:
qj + ∑
k∈Ωv
(pk −τk −mcv
k)
|
{z
}
Vehicle markup, mkv
k
∂qk
∂pj
= 0.
(3)
Note that ∂qk
∂pj is known after demand estimation. Inverting the system of FOCs in Equation (3)
yields a vector of markups for all EV producers mk
mk
mkv = {mkv
j}j=1,...,|Ωv|;v=1,...,V (where |Ωv| is the
number of products by firm v and V is the total number of EV producers).
3.2
Upstream Markups
We explore a variety of supply-side models to recover upstream markups, including two variants
of the Nash-in-Nash bargaining model (Horn and Wolinsky, 1988), the linear pricing model, and
an alternative bargaining model that incorporates forward-looking considerations.12 Our preferred
approach is the bargaining model because it is well-suited to the market structure of the EV sup-
ply chain with a small number of upstream suppliers and downstream firms. This approach is
more flexible than the linear pricing model and uses data variation to infer which party has greater
bargaining power. We discuss these models in turn.
Nash-in-Nash Bargaining
In our first approach, EV producers and battery suppliers engage in
bilateral negotiations to determine battery prices (with the exception of BYD and AESC, which
were vertically integrated with downstream EV producers). Each EV producer and battery supplier
pair {v,b} chooses battery price for vehicle j ∈Ωv ∩Ωb (i.e., a vehicle that is produced by v and
sources from supplier b) to maximize the Nash product of their gains from trade, taking as given
11Joint ventures (JVs) are common in China. We assume JVs are separate automakers from local partners that produce
their own indigenous brands. For example, SAIC-GM, the joint venture between Shanghai Automotive Industry
Corporation (SAIC) and GM, is an automaker and sells Chevrolet, Buick, and Cadillac brands. SAIC, which owns
indigenous brands such as Roewe and Maxus, is considered a separate firm.
12We restrict attention to models of short-term (annual) contracts with linear prices, consistent with our discussions
with battery suppliers and EV producers as well as publicly released battery supply agreements (Appendix A.4).
12


===== [PAGE 15] =====

the battery prices chosen for other vehicles:
NPj(τj,τ−j) = (πv
−
dv)
|
{z
}
v’ gains from trade
(1−λ b) (πb
−
db)
|
{z
}
b’ gains from trade
λ b,
where λ b ∈(0,1) is the bargaining weight of battery supplier b.13 We use πv and πb to denote the
variable profit of EV producer v and battery supplier b, respectively, and dv and db to denote the
disagreement payoff if the negotiation fails. The battery supplier’s profit is similar to that for the
EV producer: πb(τ) = ∑j∈Ωb(τ j −mcb
j)qj(p,φ), where mcb
j denotes supplier b’s cost of producing
the battery used in vehicle j, and τj −mcb
j = mkb
j is battery supplier b’s per-unit markup.
The FOC for battery price τj is:
(1−λ b)(πb −db)∂πv
∂τj
+λ b(πv −dv)∂πb
∂τj
= 0.
(4)
We assume that if v and b disagree over τj, then vehicle j is not produced, and consumers shift to
other EV models or the outside good.
An implicit assumption of Equation (4) is that firms bargain over individual vehicle models
rather than across a portfolio. This assumption is supported by field visits and discussions with
battery and EV manufacturers, which indicate that battery cell and pack production is highly cus-
tomized – from product design and lab testing to mass production – even for models from the same
automaker.14 As a result, supply contracts are often negotiated on a model-by-model basis. In ad-
dition, an EV producer and battery supplier pair bargains over an average of 2.3 distinct EV models
per market during our sample period. Nevertheless, we later show that our estimates are similar
if we instead assume portfolio-level bargaining, where disagreement over the battery price for any
one vehicle model results in the withdrawal of the entire portfolio under negotiation.
Simultaneous Contracting and Pricing
In a vertical setting like ours with upstream suppliers
negotiating with downstream firms, there are two commonly used timing assumptions: simultane-
ous contracting and pricing, and sequential contracting and pricing. In the former case (Draganska,
Klapper, and Villas-Boas, 2010; Ho and Lee, 2017; Crawford et al., 2018; Sheu and Taragin, 2021),
battery price negotiation and vehicle price setting happen simultaneously. Consequently, EV prices
remain unchanged in the event of a bargaining breakdown. This is likely a reasonable approxima-
tion in our setting, as EV prices are typically adjusted annually rather than immediately following
changes in battery prices. This timing assumption is also computationally and conceptually much
13We examine the boundary cases below, where λ b = 0 implies EV producers make take-it-or-leave-it (TIOLI) offers
to battery suppliers. When λ b = 1, battery suppliers make TIOLI offers to EV producers, which (with sequential
contracting and pricing, see below) is equivalent to linear pricing.
14For example, battery chemistry and energy density can differ across models from the same manufacturer, and the
size and shape of battery cells are tailored to each EV model to maximize pack space, which is largely determined
by the vehicle’s chassis design.
13


===== [PAGE 16] =====

simpler than the sequential assumption and has been adopted by many recent studies.
With this timing assumption, EV producer v’s disagreement payoff is:
dv,Simult(p) =
∑
k∈Ωv,k̸=j
(pk −τk −mcv
k) ˜qk(p,φ),
where ˜qk(p,φ) is the sales of vehicle k in the scenario where vehicle j is not produced due to
a disagreement. The formulation of battery supplier b’s disagreement payoff is analogous. By
combining the FOCs defined in Equations (3) and (4) following Draganska, Klapper, and Villas-
Boas (2010), we can express the vector of battery suppliers’ markups as a function of vehicle
producers’ markups (see Appendix B.1 for the derivation):
mk
mk
mkb
|{z}
Battery markup
=
λ b
1−λ b[T b ⊗S]−1[T v ⊗S]
mk
mk
mkv
|{z}
Vehicle markup
≡
λ b
1−λ b
mkb
mkb
mkb
|{z}
Battery markup when λ b = 0.5
,
(5)
where ⊗denotes element-by-element multiplication, and Tv and Tb are ownership matrices for EV
producers and battery suppliers, respectively. Matrix S denotes how market shares of all products
change upon disagreement: the { j,k} term of S captures changes in sales of product k when v and
b disagree over the battery price for vehicle j. Ownership matrices are observed from data, and
S can be derived after estimating demand. The vector of EV producers’ markups, mk
mk
mkv, is backed
out from Equation (3). Intuitively, upstream markups depend on both the bargaining parameter
and responsiveness of the battery supplier’s sales to changes in the battery price. For example, if a
small increase in the battery price leads to a large reduction in battery sales (for instance because
consumers can easily switch to other EV models), then equilibrium upstream markups will tend
to be modest. Equation (5) suggests that battery markups can be recovered up to the bargaining
parameter λ b after the demand estimation.
Sequential Contracting and Pricing
The second bargaining model we consider assumes sequen-
tial contracting and pricing (Crawford and Yurukoglu, 2012), where negotiations over battery prices
occur first, followed by price competition among EV producers. This model allows vehicle pro-
ducers to change EV prices after a bargaining breakdown, which differs from the simultaneous
bargaining model. For example, if Tesla and Panasonic fail to reach an agreement, prices of other
vehicles would increase due to reduced downstream competition.
EV producer v’s disagreement payoff is:
dv,Sequential(p) =
∑
k∈Ωv,k̸=j
( ˜pk −τk −mcv
k) ˜qk(˜p,φ),
where ˜pk and ˜p are the new equilibrium prices under disagreement (when vehicle j is not produced).
14


===== [PAGE 17] =====

The disagreement payoff for battery supplier b is analogously defined. The components of the FOC
Equation (4) are more complex in this model for two reasons. First, calculating the disagreement
payoff is more challenging and requires solving for new equilibrium prices for all downstream
products for each bargaining pair that may disagree. Second, the derivatives of both firms’ profits
with respect to battery prices are more complex because both parties internalize the impact of
changing battery prices on EV prices and sales. We present the upstream markups in vector form
in Equation (A2), with the derivation provided in Appendix Section B.2.
Linear Pricing
Another common approach to recovering upstream markups is to assume linear
pricing, also called double-marginalization or a “take-or-leave-it offer” game. Battery suppliers
post battery prices, and EV producers purchase batteries at these posted prices and set EV prices
that include a markup over production costs. In our setting, linear pricing is a special case of
sequential contracting and pricing where battery suppliers have full bargaining power λ b = 1. The
upstream markup is:
mk
mk
mkb = −(Tb ⊗∆q
τ)−1q,
(6)
where Tb is the ownership matrix, ⊗denotes element-by-element multiplication, ∆q
τ is a matrix
that collects the derivatives of vehicle sales q with respect to battery prices τ, and q is a vector of
all vehicles’ sales (see Appendix Section B.3).
Bargaining with Dynamic Considerations
The presence of LBD can induce forward-looking
behavior, where a battery supplier reduces prices in the current period to accelerate experience
accumulation and lower costs more rapidly in future periods (Irwin and Klenow, 1994; Benkard,
2004). Such incentives may be especially strong during the early stages of learning. The models
discussed above assume static price-setting (and use time and battery supplier fixed effects to proxy
for dynamic incentives). We now extend the static framework to incorporate dynamic considera-
tions (see Appendix B.4). For simplicity, we assume that battery suppliers are forward-looking but
EV manufacturers make static decisions.
The empirical literature on bargaining models with dynamic considerations is in its early stages
(Lee and Fong, 2013; Deng et al., 2024; Dorn, 2024), partly due to the complexities of formulating
disagreement payoffs and specifying the impact of bargaining outcomes on future profits. To make
progress, we make two assumptions. First, we assume that EV producers set downstream markups
(rather than prices), while battery suppliers and EV producers negotiate over battery prices. This
assumption implies full pass-through: any reduction in battery prices is entirely reflected in EV
prices. This achieves the largest demand expansion from a battery price cut and maximizes battery
suppliers’ dynamic incentives.
The second is a simplifying behavioral assumption: when negotiating current battery prices,
suppliers do not internalize how today’s price affects their future markups, and instead expect fu-
15


===== [PAGE 18] =====

ture markups to remain at current equilibrium levels. In principle, changes in today’s battery price
can affect a supplier’s future profits through two channels: (1) by influencing future markups (2)
by influencing future sales. Under our assumption, suppliers consider only the second channel:
they anticipate that lowering today’s price enhances LBD and boosts future sales, but do not ac-
count for potential effects on future markups. This approach captures the essence of LBD dynamic
considerations where forward-looking suppliers cut prices to stimulate downstream demand, while
abstracting from complications that would make the model intractable.15
With forward-looking considerations, the gains from trade in the Nash product become:
NPj(τj,τ−j) = (πv
−
dv)
|
{z
}
v’ gains from trade
(1−λ b) (V b
−
Db)
|
{z
}
b’ gains from trade
λ b,
where battery suppliers are forward-looking due to LBD incentives: V b represents the sum of
current profit and discounted future profits under agreement, and Db denotes the corresponding sum
if today’s negotiation breaks down. We assume disagreement lasts for one period, after which the
parties resume negotiations. Under this framework, the upstream markups are defined by Equation
(A8) in Appendix B.4.
4
Estimation
Estimation closely follows Section 3 and proceeds in two steps. The first step estimates the demand
model and recovers consumer preference parameters. The second step estimates the supply side and
recovers the parameters that govern LBD as well as the bargaining weight.
4.1
Demand Estimation
Price Coefficient
The price coefficient αi in Equation (2) is specified as
αi = α1 + αc(i)
yi
+σpν p
i ,
where price sensitivity is inversely related to individuals’ income yi. We divide countries into four
groups based on income per capita and allow the coefficient on income αc(i) to vary by country
groups.16 If αc(i) is negative, low-income households are more price sensitive than high-income
households. The dispersion of price sensitivity across consumers with similar income levels is
captured by σp, and individual unobserved heterogeneous preference ν p
i is assumed to follow the
15A richer dynamic bargaining model that allows suppliers to internalize the impact of LBD on both future markups
and sales is intractable in our setting, which features multiple oligopolistic battery suppliers (sellers) and automakers
(buyers). By contrast, the most closely related theoretical paper is Deng et al. (2024) with two sellers and one buyer.
16The first group includes only China, which has the lowest income level. France, Germany, Japan, and Spain are in
the second group. The third group has Austria, Netherlands, Sweden, and the UK. The highest income group consists
of Canada, Norway, Switzerland, and the U.S.
16


===== [PAGE 19] =====

standard log-normal distribution. We fit the distribution of individuals’ income in a country-year
using a log-normal distribution with parameters µct and σct, and estimate these parameters using
the average household income, the top 10% income share, and the bottom 50% income share for
each country-year from the World Inequality Database.
Aggregate Moments
To address price endogeneity due to unobserved product attributes ξ jct, we
use two sets of aggregate instruments. The first set includes the interaction terms of battery capacity
with a dummy variable for each of the top six battery suppliers. They capture the fact that batteries
with higher capacity are more costly to produce, and these costs vary across suppliers (Li et al.,
2021). The identification assumption is that conditional on the driving range of the EV (which is
a demand shifter we control for), the battery capacity and the identity of the battery manufacturer
do not affect consumers’ EV purchase decisions.17 The second set of instruments is the absolute
difference between own attributes and average attributes of rival vehicles (within the same car
type and market-year) in terms of vehicle size, horsepower, and driving range, following Gandhi
and Houde (2019). In total, we use nine excluded instruments Zjct in addition to the exogenous
attributes X jct to construct the aggregate (macro) moment conditions:
E[ξ jct|X jct,Zjct] = 0.
Micro-Moments
We construct two types of micro-moments to facilitate the identification of pref-
erence parameters, particularly the price coefficients. The first type of micro-moments matches the
observed average income of households purchasing a specific EV model with the income predicted
by the demand model. The household surveys in China and the U.S. provide us with the average
household income for 50 popular EV models in China from 2016 to 2020 and 33 popular EV mod-
els in the U.S. in 2018, giving us a total of 83 micro-moments for Chinese and U.S. EV buyers.
The second type of micro-moments matches the observed shares of EV buyers within specific in-
come brackets to the corresponding model-predicted shares. We have data for five income groups
in Canada (2013), four in Germany (2013), six in Norway (2014), five in Japan (2015), three in
Sweden (2015), and four in the Netherlands (2019). Since these income groups are mutually ex-
clusive, we drop one group per country, resulting in a total of 21 micro-moments. We use two-step
GMM and follow Conlon and Gortmaker (2023) to construct the variance-covariance matrix and
gradients of the aggregate moments and micro-moments.18
17For example, popular automobile purchase websites (such as Autotrader, Edmunds and Car & Driver) do not disclose
the identity of battery suppliers, while information on the battery capacity is much less salient compared to the driving
range and other attributes.
18These micro-moments are obtained from the following studies: Canada from Axsen, Bailey, and Castro (2015);
Germany from Plötz et al. (2017); Norway from Bjerkan, Nørbech, and Nordtømme (2016); Sweden from Vassileva
and Campillo (2017); Netherlands from Meijssen (2019); and Japan from Okada, Tamaki, and Managi (2019).
17


===== [PAGE 20] =====

4.2
Battery Cost and LBD
Recall that vehicle prices are decomposed into marginal costs and markups for both battery sup-
pliers and EV producers, as defined in Equation (1) (bringing back the country and time subscripts
for clarity):
pjct =
mkv
jct
| {z }
EV markup
+
mkb
jct
| {z }
Battery markup
+
mcv
jct
| {z }
Non-battery EV cost
+
mcb
jct
| {z }
Battery cost
.
The vehicle markup mkv
jct is known after demand estimation, and the battery markup mkb
jct =
λ b
1−λ bmkb
jct is known up to the bargaining weight λ b following the discussions in Section 3.2. We
now describe how we separate out the battery cost mcb
jct from the non-battery cost mcc
jct and esti-
mate the cost parameters and λ b.
The marginal cost for non-battery components is specified as a function of vehicle attributes,
such as vehicle size and horsepower, and a rich set of fixed effects. We also include EV producers’
past experience to capture reductions in EV costs as a result of LBD in vehicle assembly.
The marginal cost of producing batteries – the heart of this exercise – is specified as the product
of battery capacity in kWh (denoted as BKb jct) and the cost associated with producing each kWh:19
mcb
jct = BKbjct

γ0EbtγE +CHb jctγ1 +PKbtγ2 +η ∗t
|
{z
}
cost per kWh

.
(7)
Battery supplier’s experience Ebt is defined as the past cumulative production and measured in units
of all vehicle models that were sold and sourced batteries from supplier b:
Ebt = ∑
s<t∑
c
∑
j∈I {Ibcs=1}
qjcs,
where qjcs is the sales of vehicle j in country c and year s, and I {Ibcs = 1} denotes the set of
vehicle models in country c and year s that source batteries from supplier b. The key parameter
of interest is the learning coefficient γE, which determines the rate at which the unit cost (i.e., per
kWh) of battery manufacturing decreases when production experience doubles.20 The baseline cost
without learning, or the initial production cost, is captured by γ0.
In addition to supplier experience, we also control for battery chemical type CHb jct (e.g., NMC,
NCA or LFP), the battery plant’s capacity PKbt in GWh that reflects economies of scale,21 and input
costs. Given the significant changes in production technology over the past decade (advancements
in battery size and efficiency), we use a time trend η ∗t to control for industry-wide technological
19We follow the industry convention that reports battery costs in unit of kWh (Bloomberg NEF, 2023).
20The learning rate, or the Spence coefficient, is 1−2γE, which can be interpreted as the percentage cost reduction as
a result of doubling experience.
21As plant size grows, the marginal cost of producing a battery may decrease due to economies of scale. For multi-
plant firms, we use the median capacity across all plants. The LBD estimates are similar whether we use the median,
mean, maximum capacity, or the sum of capacity across all plants.
18


===== [PAGE 21] =====

progress over time. In robustness checks, we consider a more flexible specification that has year
fixed effects interacted with battery capacity (i.e., ηt instead of η ∗t). We also report analyses where
we control for firm-level innovation using patent data, as well as a specification where we include
country fixed effects interacted with battery capacity in order to account for country differences in
input costs and human capital. As pointed out by Thompson (2001), failure to control for factors
that influence unit production costs, such as capital size, could inflate LBD estimates. We demon-
strate in Section 5 that the LBD estimate reduces substantially once we account for technological
advancements, changes in chemistry type, economies of scale, and accumulated experience in EV
assembly (a shifter in EV producers’ marginal cost).
Combining Equations (1), (5) (or Equations (A2), (6), and (A8) for sequential contracting and
pricing, linear pricing, and bargaining models with dynamic considerations, respectively), and (7),
the LBD estimating equation is as follows:
pjct −mkv
jct =
λ b
1−λ bmkb
jct +BKb jct

γ0EbtγE +CHb jctγ1 +PKbtγ2 +η ∗t
|
{z
}
Battery cost per kWh

+xvjctγ v +fixed effects+ωjct,
(8)
where xv jct reflects marginal costs of producing a vehicle’s non-battery components (e.g., those
depending on vehicle size and horsepower, as well as EV producers’ experience). The set of fixed
effects includes country, EV maker (e.g. Tesla), battery supplier (e.g. LG), and year fixed effects.
Country fixed effects control for unobserved cost differentials at the country level, such as supply
chain advantages in China vs. other countries. The battery supplier and year fixed effects capture
supplier reputation and other industry-level dynamics. The residual ωjct captures the remainder
of unobserved cost shocks. Different from standard supply-side analyses (Berry, Levinsohn, and
Pakes, 1995), ωjct includes unobserved cost shocks to both EV production and battery production,
the latter of which is included as part of the battery prices that EV producers pay to battery suppliers.
4.3
Empirical Challenges
There are three challenges in estimating Equation (8). First, battery firms’ cumulative experience is
likely to be endogenous. Past sales qjcs could be correlated with serially correlated cost shocks ωjct
that capture the unobserved production efficiency of battery supplier b. Additionally, the supply
network that partially determines past sales could be endogenous since productive and low-cost
battery suppliers might supply more EV models.
To address endogeneity, we construct an instrumental variable that leverages exogenous varia-
tion in demand shifters, in the spirit of Benkard (2000), Gowrisankaran, Ho, and Town (2006) and
19


===== [PAGE 22] =====

Covert and Sweeney (2022):
IVbt = ∑
s<t∑
c ∑
j
ˆPr jbcs(z jbcs) ˆqjcs(Xcs,φcs),
(9)
where IVbt, the instrument for past cumulative experience Ebt, is the sum of predicted past sales
and consists of two sets of predicted outcomes. To address the endogeneity of past sales, we use
the demand model in Equation (2) to construct predicted sales, ˆq jcs(Xcs,φcs), as a function only of
EV subsidies φcs = {φkcs}Jcs
k=1 and vehicle attributes Xcs = {Xkcs}Jcs
k=1 (where Xkcs denotes the EV
attributes of vehicle k, and Jcs the number of EV models sold in country c at time s).
To address the concern that the observed supplier network is potentially endogenous, we use a
discrete choice model of supplier choices to predict the probability that vehicle model j in country
c and year s sources batteries from supplier b, ˆPr jbcs(z jbcs). The exogenous shifters z jbcs include
home bias (to capture the fact that EV producers are more likely to source from domestic battery
suppliers), China’s White List policy, EV attributes, battery supplier characteristics that are pre-
determined in the initial year that we observe them (firm age, average battery size, initial battery
chemistry etc.), and the EV producer–battery supplier network in the initial year. Appendix A.3
provides more details.
Crucially, our instrument of predicted experience is constructed without using EV prices (which
may be affected by unobservable cost shocks ωjcs). Instead, the IV leverages several sources of
plausibly exogenous variation in demand shifters. First, it exploits rich variation in EV subsidies
across countries, models, and time (i.e., φcs). A battery supplier that sells batteries to EV models
eligible for more generous subsidies will gain experience more quickly. The identification assump-
tion here is that, conditional on the included controls and fixed effects, variation in EV subsidies
across countries and over time is uncorrelated with vehicle and battery cost shocks ωjct.22
Second, the experience of the battery supplier for any given EV model also varies with the
characteristics of other competing EVs in the market, in the spirit of “BLP instruments". For exam-
ple, if EV model j faces many close substitutes, its demand will be lower, reducing the experience
accumulated by its battery supplier. For identification, we require that the characteristics of rival
products are uncorrelated with unobserved vehicle and battery costs for vehicle j.23
Third, the IV also exploits variation in the initial EV producer–battery supplier network, as well
22This is likely to hold in our setting. For example, the notched subsidy design based on the driving range in China
lends to an RD-type variation in that the amount of subsidy changes discretely at the range cutoffs, but unobserved
vehicle and battery costs are unlikely to change discretely at these cutoffs (Figure A3). Similar IVs exploiting subsidy
variation have also been used by Wang and Xing (2024) and Barwick, Kwon, and Li (2024).
23Note that the vehicle’s own characteristics, X jct, are directly controlled for in the supply-side estimation and included
as part of xvjct in Equation (8). One potential concern is that the IV is non-linear in X jct, whereas we restrict costs to
be linear in X jct. We conduct a robustness check where we control for higher-order polynomials of X jct in Equation
(8) and find very similar results.
20


===== [PAGE 23] =====

as differences in battery suppliers’ exposure to China’s whitelist policy. Both factors influence the
probability that a battery supplier is selected for a vehicle model, thereby affecting its experience
accumulation. For identification, we assume that the initial producer-supplier network is exogenous
to future unobserved cost shocks ωjt. We also assume that the introduction of the Whitelist policy
(and its withdrawal in 2019) is uncorrelated with ωjt, though results are similar if we exclude the
Whitelist dummy from z jbcs.24
A second, related challenge in estimating Equation (8) is that an EV producer’s past experience,
a control in xvjct, is also endogenous and correlated with ωjct. We address this by constructing
predicted EV producer experience, analogous to our approach for battery supplier experience, and
using it as an IV for EV experience.
The third estimation challenge concerns the bargaining parameter λ b: the battery markup term
mkb
jct could be correlated with cost shocks that capture supplier b’s unobserved production effi-
ciency. This is because firms’ optimal pricing strategies and equilibrium markups depend on their
costs. We follow a similar strategy as above and construct an IV of predicted markups using only
exogenous variation in subsidies, whitelist policy, and vehicle attributes. We first regress EV prices
on observed attributes, subsidies, and fixed effects to obtain predicted prices for each vehicle model.
We then use predicted prices to re-calculate market shares, vehicle markups, and battery markups.
By construction, the predicted battery markups are exogenous to cost shocks ωjct and serve as a
valid IV.25 The bargaining parameter λ b is identified from exogenous shifts to battery suppliers’
markups as a result of changes in their bargaining leverage. For example, China’s whitelist policy
enhanced the bargaining position of Chinese battery suppliers relative to EV makers. The degree
to which this policy affects vehicle prices is informative of λ b. If λ b = 0 (i.e., EV producers make
take-it-or-leave-it offers), batteries are supplied at cost and changes in upstream bargaining leverage
would have no effect on EV prices.
5
Estimation Results
5.1
Demand Results
Table 2 reports parameter estimates for EV demand. There are a total of 4,556 observations. All
columns include market (country by year), brand, and car type (sedan, coupe, SUV, van, and hatch-
back) fixed effects. The first column shows results from a simple multinomial logit model using
24One potential concern is that the Whitelist policy could be correlated with ωjt if it aimed to shield Chinese suppliers
from foreign competition. As a robustness check, we construct an alternative IV excluding the Whitelist dummy
from (z jbcs)) and find nearly identical results.
25This strategy for constructing IVs is similar to that used in prior studies employing Nash-in-Nash bargaining models,
such as Gowrisankaran, Nevo, and Town (2015) and Ho and Lee (2017).
21


===== [PAGE 24] =====

OLS (i.e., Berry-logit). The second column instruments for vehicle price using the two sets of
IVs discussed earlier: the interactions between battery supplier dummies and battery capacity to
capture the cost variation in battery production and IVs based on observed vehicle attributes. As
is common in the demand literature, the OLS estimate of price coefficient in Column (1) is much
smaller in absolute value than the 2SLS estimate in Column (2) due to the positive correlation be-
tween unobserved product attributes and prices. The OLS estimate on vehicle volume (i.e., length
by width by height) is also counterintuitive. In contrast, all 2SLS estimates are intuitively signed:
consumers dislike higher prices but prefer larger sizes and horsepower. Consumers prefer a longer
driving range, but the range preference is much weaker for PHEVs. Finally, we find significant
home bias in consumer demand for EVs, echoing findings in other studies of automobile markets
(Goldberg and Verboven, 2001; Co¸sar et al., 2018; Barwick, Cao, and Li, 2021).
Column (3) reports results from our preferred specification, the random coefficients model with
heterogeneous preferences. As in Column (2), all parameter estimates have the expected sign.
High-income households are less price sensitive, but there is significant heterogeneity across coun-
try groups in how income correlates with price sensitivity. We allow random coefficients on the
constant term, vehicle attributes, and price to capture preference heterogeneity, all of which are es-
timated precisely. There is significant variation in price sensitivity even after controlling for income
(the random coefficient on price is sizeable).
Panel (a) of Figure 4 presents the histogram of price elasticities for all EV models in our sam-
ple.26The average price elasticity is -3.48, with a standard deviation of 1.49. These estimates are
consistent with the existing literature on EV demand (Li et al., 2017; Li, 2018; Springel, 2019;
Xing, Leard, and Li, 2021; Muehlegger and Rapson, 2022). Panel (b) depicts semi-elasticities
against post-subsidy vehicle prices by country group, where the semi-elasticity is the percentage
change in sales for a $1,000 reduction in a vehicle’s post-subsidy price. The percentage increase
in sales is greater for cheaper vehicles, driven by higher demand elasticities for these models as
their buyers typically have lower incomes. China has the largest number of EVs with post-subsidy
prices below $40,000. It also exhibits the highest sales-weighted semi-elasticity (in absolute value)
at 10.2%, consistent with Chinese consumers having the lowest average income among the 13
countries studied. The sales-weighted semi-elasticity for the other three country groups ranges
from 6.3% to 7.5%.
26Demand elasticity is less than one (in absolute value) for 60 of the 4,556 observations. Most of these inelastic cases
stem from the multi-product nature of automakers, leaving only eight observations with negative marginal costs. We
retain these eight observations in the cost-side estimation sample.
22


===== [PAGE 25] =====

5.2
Supply Side Results
IVs for Experience and Markups
As explained in Section 4.3, we use exogenous variation in
demand shifters, government policies, and a supplier choice model to construct predicted experi-
ences for battery suppliers and EV producers and predicted supplier markups. Figure A4 presents
evidence that these are strong IVs: there is a strong positive correlation between these instruments
and their endogenous counterparts after partialling out vehicle attributes and a rich set of country,
brand, and year fixed effects.
Cost Estimates with Simultaneous Contracting and Pricing
We first present cost estimates
and the magnitude of LBD for our preferred supply-side model, bargaining with simultaneous
contracting and pricing, followed by results from alternative supply-side models.
Table 3 presents the GMM estimates for Equation (8). We categorize the parameters into four
groups: (1) those linking battery production costs to LBD and battery attributes, (2) those that relate
vehicle production costs (excluding batteries) to vehicle attributes, (3) the bargaining weight, and
(4) fixed effects to control for unobserved cost shocks in both battery and vehicle production.27 The
experience and markups of battery suppliers and the experience of EV producers are instrumented
in all columns as discussed above.
Column (1) controls for only the experience of battery suppliers, vehicle attributes, and coun-
try, automaker, battery supplier and year fixed effects. The learning parameter γE is estimated to be
-0.218, suggesting a learning rate of 1−2−0.218 = 16%. The coefficient γ0 represents the baseline
cost, which is the battery production cost when a firm begins production (with experience set to
1). The baseline cost is $1,286 per kWh in 2013. Column (2) incorporates industry-wide tech-
nological progress in battery production. The estimate on time trend indicates a $23 reduction in
battery cost per kWh each year. At the same time, the learning parameter reduces from -0.218 to
-0.151, suggesting that failing to account for industry-wide technology progress could confound
LBD estimates. Column (3) further controls for economies of scale by including plant capacity,
while Column (4) adds the experience of EV producers (which we instrument for) to account for
potential learning in EV assembly. Column (4) is our preferred specification with all the relevant
controls and is used for subsequent counterfactual analyses in Section 6. Including these additional
controls in Column (4) results in several notable changes.
First, the learning coefficient decreases from 0.218 in Column (1) to 0.140 in Column (4),
implying a learning rate (the Spence coefficient) of 9.2%. That is, when production experience
doubles, the marginal cost of producing batteries decreases by 9.2%. This is much lower than the
20-28% estimates reported in industry studies using aggregate data (Ziegler and Trancik, 2021),
27We cannot separately identify the level of battery cost from that of vehicle cost, which are captured by fixed effects.
23


===== [PAGE 26] =====

which often do not adequately control for industry-wide technological progress and other cost
shocks. The learning rate in well-known economic studies varies between 5-30%. For example,
it is estimated at 20% in the semiconductor industry from 1974-1992 (Irwin and Klenow, 1994)
and in the construction of Liberty ships during World War II (Thompson, 2001), at approximately
30% in aircraft manufacturing from 1970-1984 (Benkard, 2000), between 14-29% in wind turbine
production from 2000-2019 (Covert and Sweeney, 2022), and around 5-8% in the global semicon-
ductor sector from 2004-2015 (Goldberg et al., 2024). There is considerable variation in learning
rate estimates across studies, driven by the nature of the industry (capital-intensive versus labor-
intensive), knowledge stock depreciation (or organizational forgetting due to employee turnover),
as well as whether other important factors are controlled, such as industry-wide technology progress
and economies of scale (Argote and Epple, 1990; Thompson, 2012).
Second, the time trend estimates indicate that battery costs decrease by $28 per kWh annu-
ally, or approximately 2.9% of the baseline cost ($958 per kWh in Column (4)). This indicates
substantial technological progress in EV battery production during our data period, as discussed
in more detail below.
The coefficient estimate on plant capacity in Column (4) is intuitively
signed and precisely estimated, suggesting that doubling capacity lowers costs by $55/kWh (=0.080
×ln(2)×$1000).
Third, the coefficient estimate for EV experience suggests that doubling EV manufacturing
experience reduces unit production costs by $1000 × ln(2) × (−1.104) = $765. At this rate, EV
manufacturers’ cumulative experience over the sample period lowered EV prices by $3,380 (5.5%).
Lastly, the estimated bargaining weight for battery suppliers declines from 0.504 in Column
(1) to 0.311 in Column (4). A weight of 0.5 implies roughly equal bargaining power between
battery suppliers and EV producers, which is unlikely given that batteries account for less than
one-third of total EV production costs. It would also imply upstream markups of $313/kWh, which
is implausibly high relative to Bloomberg’s battery pack prices of $200/kWh toward the end of
the sample period. In contrast, a bargaining weight of 0.311 implies upstream markups of approxi-
mately $142/kWh, a more plausible estimate relative to battery pack prices and closer in magnitude
to CATL’s reported markups.28
Magnitude of LBD
To quantify the magnitude of LBD and its contribution to battery price re-
ductions over the past decade, we simulate sales-weighted predicted battery prices from 2014 to
2020 under different scenarios, shown in Panel (a) of Figure 5. The green line with circles rep-
resents the battery price index from Bloomberg NEF (2023). The black line with triangles shows
model-predicted prices based solely on the time trend (an annual decline of $28 per kWh), capturing
28CATL’s average reported markup was $83 per kWh between 2015 and 2020 (CATL’s Annual Reports).
24


===== [PAGE 27] =====

industry-wide technological advancements. Overall, technological progress accounted for 33.9%
of the observed price reduction. The blue line with diamonds (second from the top) incorporates
both LBD and the time trend. LBD contributed to another 42.0% of the total decline from 2014 to
2020. Finally, the red line with diamonds (third from the top) represents the full model predictions,
which also incorporate the effects of growing economies of scale and changes in battery chemistry
and input costs.29
To illustrate how LBD has contributed to changes in battery prices across the three major pro-
duction countries, Panel (b) of Figure 5 reports price reductions driven by cumulative production
experience for the leading battery suppliers: BYD and CATL in China, Panasonic and AESC in
Japan, and LG and Samsung in South Korea. In 2014, the average battery cost was $810 per kWh
among top Chinese suppliers (γ0Ebt,ChinaγE), compared to $680 per kWh among the leading South
Korean suppliers and $550 per kWh among the top Japanese suppliers. By 2018, Chinese suppliers
had caught up with their South Korean counterparts, and by 2020, they had also closed the gap
with Japanese suppliers. These cost estimates align well with the free-on-board battery prices by
country of origin in UN Comtrade. As shown in Figure 3, Chinese battery exports were the least
expensive among all major exporting countries by 2020.
5.3
Alternative Specifications
Technological Progress, Patents, and Innovation
Our baseline specification includes a linear
time trend in battery costs to account for industry-wide technological progress. To allow for poten-
tial non-linearity in technological progress, we consider a more flexible specification by interacting
year fixed effects with battery capacity. The estimated learning parameter is -0.159 in Column (1)
of Table 4, similar to the baseline estimate of -0.140 in Column (4) of Table 3.
One potential concern is that firm-level innovation may be confounded with LBD. To address
this, we control for the cumulative number of patents filed by each battery supplier since 2008.
Because patenting activity could be correlated with cost shocks, we instrument for it using the bat-
tery firm’s exposure to EV-targeted industrial policies across countries, following Barwick et al.
(2024).30 The results in Column (2) of Table 4 show a negative coefficient on the patent vari-
able, consistent with firm innovations reducing costs. The coefficient on the time trend decreases,
29Since we cannot separately identify the levels of battery prices and vehicle costs, we calibrate the 2014 battery price to
match Bloomberg’s price index for that year. Our model’s predictions closely track the overall price decline reported
by Bloomberg. Remaining discrepancies are partly driven by coverage differences: we focus on passenger EVs,
whereas Bloomberg’s index is based on survey data that also includes commercial vehicles and storage batteries.
30The policy exposure IV is a sales-weighted sum of policy counts, where the weights are the supplier’s predicted
sales in each country. Details on the construction of patents and industrial policies are provided in Barwick et al.
(2024), which also documents a positive relationship between EV industrial policies and patenting, motivating our
IV strategy.
25


===== [PAGE 28] =====

reflecting that technological progress is partly driven by firm-level innovations. Importantly, the
LBD estimate remains very close to the baseline, suggesting that LBD on the production floor and
innovation through patenting activities are distinct sources of cost reduction.
Cost Estimates from Alternative Bargaining Models
Our baseline assumption is that bargain-
ing occurs at the individual vehicle model level. If a vehicle manufacturer and supplier pair dis-
agrees over the battery price for a given model, only that model is withdrawn from the market.
In Column (3) of Table 4, we present results under a “portfolio bargaining” assumption: if the
upstream and downstream firms fail to reach an agreement on any one product, all products they
bargain over are withdrawn. The estimates for all key parameters (including the LBD parameters
and bargaining weight) are nearly identical to the baseline, which is unsurprising given that EV
makers and battery suppliers negotiate over a relatively small portfolio of 2.3 distinct models in
each market.
We next examine whether the learning rate estimate is sensitive to the bargaining parameter.
Table A3 reports cost estimates when the battery supplier’s bargaining weight λ varies from 0 to
0.5, using the same supply-side model as in Table 3. Values above 0.5 are excluded because they
imply negative marginal costs for battery production. The LBD estimates remain stable across
λ values. Intuitively, while the bargaining weight (and supply-side assumptions more generally)
affects the level of predicted battery prices (higher λ implies greater supplier markups and thus
higher battery prices), LBD is determined by the slope of battery prices with respect to cumulative
experience, which remains robust across specifications.
As an alternative to the simultaneous contracting and pricing model, we estimate cost param-
eters under sequential contracting and pricing: EV makers and battery suppliers negotiate battery
prices first, followed by EV makers setting downstream prices. If there is disagreement in up-
stream negotiations, downstream EV makers adjust prices for all EV models. Appendix Table
A4 reports cost estimates for different bargaining weight λ b. The linear pricing model (double-
marginalization) is a special case of sequential contracting and pricing with λ b = 1 and is shown in
the last column. The LBD estimates are similar to the baseline and remain robust across columns.31
Cost Estimates with Dynamic Considerations
Table A5 presents the learning estimates γE
when battery suppliers are forward-looking. At one extreme, with λ = 0 (Column (1)), suppli-
ers earn zero markups and thus no dynamic markdown incentive exists. At the other extreme,
with λ = 1 (Column (5)), battery suppliers capture the maximum possible surplus in negotiations,
creating the strongest incentives to lower current battery prices to accelerate LBD. The estimates
31The specifications in Columns (4) and (5) of Tables A4 and A5 lead to negative marginal costs. We present these
results mainly to illustrate the robustness of LBD estimates to bargaining weights.
26


===== [PAGE 29] =====

align with this intuition: γE is smallest (in absolute value) when λ = 0 and largest when dynamic
incentives are strongest. Nonetheless, the differences are modest relative to the baseline estimate
of -0.140, ranging from -0.123 at λ = 0 to -0.141 at λ = 1.
These results indicate that, although LBD in battery production could in theory generate forward-
looking behavior, ignoring dynamics does not materially bias the learning rate estimates in our set-
ting. There are several reasons. First, all specifications include time fixed effects, which capture
dynamic incentives at the industry level. Second, given the oligopolistic market structure of both
upstream and downstream sectors and the fact that upstream firms’ bargaining weight is well be-
low one), battery suppliers capture only a small fraction of the economic gains from LBD (Section
6.1), dampening their dynamic incentive. Third, for the range of learning rates we have obtained,
dynamic incentives dissipate rapidly after a few years.32
Scope of LBD
Our analysis thus far focuses on internal LBD, i.e., learning that occurs within
a firm. Historically, many policies targeting “infant industries” (to which the EV and EV battery
sectors belong) have been motivated by the potential for external learning, where experience ac-
cumulated by local suppliers generate spillover benefits for other suppliers in the same industry
and country (Melitz, 2005). Understanding the magnitude of such spillovers has significant pol-
icy implications. However, identifying the full scope of spillovers poses additional challenges and
requires extra sources of variation and exogenous shocks to assess their impact properly.
We first explore learning spillovers across firms within the same country. We define a sup-
plier’s effective experience as the sum of its own experience and a fraction of the experience of
rival firms in that country. The parameter θ measures the spillover completeness. If θ = 1, learn-
ing from rivals’ experience is as effective as learning from one’s own, whereas θ = 0 implies no
learning spillover. We instrument for effective experience using predicted own and predicted rival
experience based on exogenous variations as shown in Equation (9).
Column (4) of Table 4 reports the results. The θ estimate is 0.034, indicating that one unit of
rival experience generates only 3.4% of the learning derived from own experience. The estimate
is imprecise due to limited variation in rival experience across firms, especially for small battery
suppliers. At θ = 0.034, learning from rivals constitutes a small share of overall learning for the
top six battery suppliers, but accounts for 49% of the total learning for other firms by the end of the
32Consider a hypothetical scenario where supplier b reduces battery prices by 30% in year t. This translates to a 10%
reduction in prices of EV models that source from firm b (battery is 30% of an EV price) and a 35% increase in their
sales in year t at our estimated demand elasticity. Assuming supplier b has no prior production experience (so the
effect of LBD is strongest), the 35% increase in sales translates to a 35% increase in cumulative experience. At a
learning rate of 9.2%, battery costs in year t +1 would drop by 3.2%. Supposing all cost savings are passed through
to battery prices and fully reflected in EV prices, this would lead to a 1% reduction in EV prices and a 3.5% sales
increase in year t +1. This smaller sales increase results in a marginal gain in experience in year t +2 and a negligible
cost reduction in subsequent years.
27


===== [PAGE 30] =====

sample period.
We also investigate cross-chemistry learning within a firm, where effective experience is the
sum of experience in producing batteries of a given chemistry type and a fraction (θ) of experience
producing batteries of other chemistry types. The θ estimate is imprecise, as over 80% of battery
suppliers produce only one chemistry type, limiting variation across firms. Finally, we explore
learning spillover across countries. However, global experience is highly correlated with the time
trend, making reliable estimation of global LBD challenging.
Other Robustness Checks
Column (1) of Table A6 includes EV brand fixed effects on top of
automaker fixed effects. The learning parameter γE is relatively similar in magnitude, equal to -
0.177 (compared to -0.140 in the baseline specification). The remaining parameters are also quite
similar in magnitude. Column (2) controls for BK*country fixed effects in order to account for
country differences in unobserved input costs and human capital, finding similar estimates – in
particular, the LBD parameter γE equals -0.119 under this specification.
The final two columns of Table A6 address a few potential identification concerns we fore-
shadowed in Section 4.3. First, to address possible endogeneity of China’s Whitelist policy, we
re-construct IVs excluding the Whitelist policy. As Column (3) shows, this yields very similar
supply-side estimates, with γE equal to -0.147. Second, vehicle characteristics enter linearly into
the cost function, but our IV is a non-linear function of these characteristics, which could lead to
omitted variable bias if costs are non-linear in vehicle characteristics. However, as Column (4)
of Table A6 shows, the LBD estimates are quite similar (with γE = −0.123) when we control for
second-order polynomials in horsepower and volume.
5.4
Market Failures with Learning-by-Doing
Our analysis in Section 5.3 indicates that while learning spillovers to other firms in the same coun-
try are positive, the estimates are statistically insignificant. If LBD is entirely internal to a firm,
can government interventions be justified, aside from environmental benefits and technological
spillovers to other sectors? Economic theory suggests two reasons why subsidies may still improve
welfare even when learning is firm-specific.
First, market power distortions can lead to insufficient learning.33 The intuition is that some of
the gains from LBD are captured by consumers in the form of lower prices, reducing the incentive
for firms with market power to invest in cost reduction through LBD. This is akin to the “Arrow
33For example, Fudenberg and Tirole (1991) show that a monopolist learns too little relative to the social optimum.
Cabral and Riordan (1994) develop a duopoly model with firm-specific LBD and show that equilibrium learning
is too slow when firms are sufficiently patient. LBD without spillovers is a special case of the model considered
in Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1988), who demonstrate that under certain conditions, subsidizing an “infant” domestic
monopoly that is learning can increase welfare.
28


===== [PAGE 31] =====

effect" (Arrow, 1962). Second, in vertical supply chains such as the EV industry, input suppliers
negotiate prices with downstream firms. If suppliers have limited bargaining power, they may be
unable to fully appropriate the surplus from learning, lessening their incentive to engage in LBD.
To evaluate the extent to which battery firms can capture the benefits of LBD, we conduct
simulations that exogenously increase battery suppliers’ experience (and hence LBD) and examine
the long-run impacts. Table A7 presents welfare changes from a one-time increase in CATL’s
experience in 2013, where its cumulative past sales that year were raised by 10,000 vehicle units.
We conduct an analogous analysis for Panasonic. These shocks lower upstream firms’ (CATL and
Panasonic) future production costs, reducing input costs and raising profits for downstream firms,
and ultimately benefiting end-users (consumers) when some of the cost savings are passed through.
We simulate the industry equilibrium from 2013 to 2020 using the model outlined in Section 3. For
ease of comparison, we normalize the increase in the battery supplier’s own profit to one, so that all
other changes are relative to this benchmark. The first three columns report welfare changes for the
home country (China for CATL), the rest of the world, and globally, following CATL’s experience
increase. The next three columns present the corresponding results for Panasonic.
We find that CATL captures only 25.2% of the global surplus generated by its increased LBD,
while Panasonic captures 32.9%. This is in part driven by the limited bargaining power of battery
firms: if the Nash bargaining weight were 0.5 (rather than our estimate of 0.311), CATL’s share
would rise to 41% and Panasonic’s to 43%. In addition, the distribution of welfare gains depends
heavily on the localization of the supply chain. China captures the entirety of the global welfare
gains from CATL’s cost reductions with its largely domestic EV supply chain. In contrast, Japan
captures only 32.3% of the global welfare gains from Panasonic’s cost reductions, with a significant
portion accruing to downstream firms and consumers abroad. These results highlight that upstream
LBD generates substantial externalities for downstream firms and consumers, and that these bene-
fits often cross country borders through global supply chains. Such externalities underpin the large
welfare impacts of government interventions documented in Section 6.34
6
Counterfactual Analyses
We first evaluate the role of LBD in promoting EV demand. We then quantify the welfare effects
of prominent EV policies with and without LBD incorporated. Given the stability of the LBD
estimates across supply-side assumptions, all counterfactual simulations are conducted based on
our preferred specification in Column (4) of Table 3.
34While not the focus of this paper, LBD also creates (intertemporal) complementarities among downstream products
that share a common supplier. Positive demand shocks for one product increase the upstream supplier’s LBD, leading
to lower future prices for rival products with the same supplier and boosting demand for those rival products.
29


===== [PAGE 32] =====

6.1
The Effect of LBD
To investigate the role of LBD and its impact on EV adoption, we simulate aggregate EV sales for
the top 13 EV countries from 2013-2020 under four scenarios, as illustrated in Figure 6. These sce-
narios, represented by the four lines from bottom to top, are: (1) a baseline with neither consumer
subsidies nor LBD; (2) consumer subsidies without LBD; (3) LBD without consumer subsidies;
and (4) both consumer subsidies and LBD.
LBD creates a positive “feedback loop”: subsidies boost EV sales, which enhances battery
production experience, leading to lower battery costs and EV prices. These price reductions, in
turn, further accelerate EV adoption, amplifying the direct effects of consumer subsidies and other
supportive policies. Specifically, compared to the baseline scenario, consumer subsidies alone in-
creased cumulative sales by 27.9% (0.83 million units) during 2013-2020. Absent any subsidies,
cost reductions driven by LBD alone resulted in a 95.4% increase in global EV sales (2.83 million
units) during the same period. When both consumer subsidies and LBD were in effect, global EV
sales surged by 204% (6.06 million units) relative to the baseline. This combined “snowball” effect
is 65.5% larger than the sum of their individual contributions, underscoring the strong complemen-
tarity between LBD and consumer subsidies.
6.2
Algorithm for Counterfactual Policy Analyses
Next, we conduct counterfactual simulations to examine two types of prominent government poli-
cies: (1) consumer subsidies and (2) domestic content requirements, such as China’s whitelist
policy. As the latter policy is likely to shift battery sales from foreign to domestic suppliers, we
develop a network formation model in Appendix C. The model features the whitelist policy and ac-
counts for the higher likelihood of more experienced battery firms supplying a given EV model.35
For each counterfactual analysis, we perform 100 simulations and report the average outcomes.
In each simulation, we (1) construct a supply network based on the network formation model in
Appendix C, (2) solve for battery prices, vehicle prices, and EV sales, (3) update battery supplier
experience and production costs, and (4) repeat steps (1)-(3) for all subsequent years in the sample.
6.3
Consumer Subsidies
We examine the impact of consumer subsidies in China, Europe, and the U.S. (including Canada)
on EV adoption and social welfare from 2013 to 2020. The results are presented in Table 5. The
top row in each panel reports welfare changes by region, measured as the sum of consumer surplus
35Key controls of this discrete-choice model include: a dummy for China’s whitelist policy, battery suppliers’ experi-
ence, a home bias dummy, dummies for vertically integrated supplier-automaker pairs, the subsidy rate offered by
country c at time t for a given EV model, initial attributes of battery suppliers, and the lagged network structure.
30


===== [PAGE 33] =====

and firm profits minus subsidy expenditures. The first four columns present the welfare effects for
China, Europe, Japan and South Korea, and North America (U.S. and Canada), respectively, while
the last column, titled “Global”, aggregates welfare changes across all regions.36
Panel (a) of Table 5 highlights the impact of U.S. subsidies while holding fixed subsidies in
other regions and China’s whitelist policy. The U.S. spent $14.05 billion on subsidies and gen-
erated $19.7 billion in global welfare gains, with 49% accruing domestically.37 The interaction
of subsidies with LBD significantly lowered battery costs for U.S. (and Canadian) EV producers,
reduced vehicle prices for domestic consumers, and boosted local EV sales by 0.84 million units.
Outside North America, Japan and South Korea were the largest beneficiaries, as U.S. EV
production relies on batteries from these countries. Battery suppliers in Japan and South Korea
captured 31% of the global welfare gains, while their EV producers and consumers gained another
6%, bringing their combined share to 37%. Europe also experienced substantial gains. In contrast,
China accounted for only 2% of the global total. This modest share reflects China’s limited EV
trade, minimal battery exports (unlike Japan and South Korea), and low battery imports during
the sample period. The only group that was hurt by U.S. subsidies was Chinese battery suppliers,
whose rivals in Japan and Korea became more competitive through accelerated learning and gained
market share, especially in the Chinese EV battery market. Table A9 reports welfare impacts
that incorporate the environmental benefits of EV adoption, as described in Appendix C.3. These
benefits amount to roughly half the consumer surplus gains generated by the subsidies.
Panel (b) shows that European subsidies, like those in the U.S., generated substantial welfare
gains for consumers and EV producers, with Japan and South Korea benefiting most due to their
role as primary battery suppliers for EVs sold in Europe. However, key differences remain: Euro-
pean governments invested $18.44 billion in subsidies but achieved lower global welfare gains of
$14.17 billion. This was partly due to the widespread use of uniform subsidies, which proved less
effective at boosting consumer surplus than the battery-capacity-based subsidies employed in the
U.S. (Barwick, Kwon, and Li, 2024). The EU captured only 21% of the welfare gains, reflecting
its greater reliance on imported EVs.
Panel (c) reports the effects of Chinese subsidies, totaling $31.93 billion. These subsidies gener-
ated $42.62 billion in global welfare gains, 92.5% of which were captured domestically. Spillovers
to other regions were modest compared to those from U.S. and European subsidies, due to China’s
limited EV imports and domestic sourcing of EV batteries.
36Profits for battery suppliers and EV producers are allocated to the country of their headquarters. Results are qualita-
tively similar if we allocate EV producers’ profits to the EV production country.
37Subsidies generate welfare gains through at least two channels. First, they correct the underprovision of LBD (Section
5.4), which reduces production costs and generates economic benefits. Second, subsidies mitigate deadweight losses
from market power distortions, as shown in Barwick, Kwon, and Li (2024).
31


===== [PAGE 34] =====

Summary
Table 5 highlights three key findings. First, consumer subsidies generate welfare gains
that are amplified by LBD and spillover to other countries through battery supply networks. As
shown in Table 8, both the welfare gains and cross-country spillovers are several times smaller in
the absence of LBD.
Second, the magnitude of cross-country spillovers hinges crucially on the overlap in battery
supply networks. Strong spillovers between the US and the EU reflect their reliance on the same
battery suppliers in Japan and South Korea. In contrast, spillovers from US or European subsidies
to China are negligible because of the limited overlap in suppliers, and Chinese subsidies generate
similarly small spillovers abroad because EVs sold in China mainly use domestic batteries.
Third, the results echo Section 5.4 and illustrate that the privately chosen experience level and
thus the degree of LBD is below the social optimum. Government subsidies can help close this gap
by encouraging greater LBD.
6.4
Domestic Content Requirements
Whitelist
To explore the impact of domestic content requirements, we begin by analyzing China’s
whitelist policy, introduced midway through our sample period. We compare outcomes with and
without the whitelist to assess: (1) the extent to which the policy propelled top Chinese battery
suppliers to global industry leadership, and (2) welfare implications for domestic and foreign firms
and consumers, which depend on cost differentials between approved suppliers and the others.
The Whitelist policy benefited Chinese battery suppliers, increasing their sales by 16.5% be-
tween 2016 and 2020 (Panel (a) of Figure A5). By accelerating experience accumulation, the policy
strengthened their global competitiveness and drove their market share growth even after the policy
ended (Figure 2). These gains came at the expense of non-Chinese battery suppliers, whose sales
were 16.6% lower relative to a no-whitelist scenario (Panel (b)).
Table 6 presents the impact of the whitelist policy. It increased Chinese battery suppliers’ profits
by over $4.36 billion but reduced domestic consumer surplus by $0.24 billion. While China’s
overall welfare effect was positive, the policy generated negative spillovers abroad. Lower demand
for Japanese and South Korean suppliers reduced their profit and slowed down LBD, which in turn
hurt downstream EV producers in Europe and the U.S., leading to slower EV adoption in those
regions. Together, the EU, Japan and South Korea, and the U.S. and Canada incurred a combined
welfare loss of $7.65 billion.
The effect on Chinese domestic EV producers was nuanced. In the early years of the whitelist
policy, some were forced to switch from lower-cost foreign suppliers to higher-cost domestic ones,
reducing profits in 2016 and 2017 relative to the no-whitelist scenario. However, by concentrating
sales among leading domestic battery suppliers, the policy accelerated LBD. As shown in Panel
32


===== [PAGE 35] =====

(b) of Figure 5, China’s top suppliers closed the cost gap with South Korean firms by 2018 and
matched their Japanese counterparts by 2020. These cost reductions ultimately boosted Chinese
EV producers’ profits in 2018-2020, turning the policy’s net impact on these firms from negative to
positive.
These results indicate that Chinese battery suppliers were the primary beneficiaries of the
whitelist policy. Chinese EV producers eventually gained, though their overall profit increase
was modest. All other stakeholders were adversely affected, underscoring the tradeoffs created
by protective policies that distort market forces. Consistent with our simulations, the policy was
discontinued in late 2019 amid opposition from EV producers and non-Chinese battery firms.
Timing of Protective Policies
China’s whitelist was introduced at a pivotal moment: the learning
curve for battery production was steep, and China became the largest EV market in 2015. We
examine the effect of postponing the policy by five years (i.e., shifting it from 2016-2019 to 2021-
2024). We assume the global market structure and subsidy rates in future years remain at their
2020 levels (Appendix C). Panels (c) and (d) in Figure A5 present the impacts on sales, and Table
7 summarizes the welfare results.
Delaying China’s whitelist policy to 2021–2024 would have been detrimental to China overall.
While Chinese battery suppliers would still have gained, their profit increases would be an order
of magnitude smaller than under the actual 2016–2019 policy, and Chinese consumers and EV
producers would have faced larger losses. This weaker effect reflects the very different market con-
ditions by 2021. The gap in production experience between foreign leaders and Chinese followers
would be far wider than in 2016, and the gains from LBD were smaller, with battery costs already
below $200/kWh versus $600–$800 in 2014.
The timing also reduced the policy’s international spillovers: by 2021, the negative impact on
foreign producers was much smaller. This is partly because Japanese and South Korean suppliers
held substantial cost advantages, limiting the potential for Chinese firms to catch up.38
The Biden administration’s IRA put into place local content requirements for EV batteries as
part of the eligibility criteria for consumer subsidies. A full policy simulation of IRA is beyond the
scope of our study, as it requires modeling changes in battery and EV production locations, given
North America’s currently limited battery production capacity. Nevertheless, our analysis suggests
that in the short run, the policy will likely generate welfare impacts that are qualitatively similar to
those under China’s delayed whitelist policy (2021-2024).
38Another factor is the change in global subsidy rates between 2016 and 2020; results are qualitatively similar under
the 2016 rates.
33


===== [PAGE 36] =====

Accounting for LBD in Policy Analysis
To illustrate the importance of accounting for LBD in
policy analysis, we simulate the effects of Chinese consumer subsidies and the whitelist policy
without LBD. Welfare gains and positive cross-country spillovers from subsidies drop to just 10-
20% of their levels with LBD, while the negative spillovers from the whitelist policy are also greatly
diminished (Table 8). These results underscore the importance of accounting for LBD in assessing
the cost-effectiveness and broader impacts of EV policies.
7
Conclusion
This paper, to our knowledge, represents the first attempt to causally quantify learning-by-doing
(LBD) in the global EV battery market and to examine the implications of LBD for EV purchase
subsidies and local content requirements on batteries. The learning rate is estimated to be 9.2%
after controlling for industry-wide technological progress, economies of scale, input costs, and
learning in EV assembly. LBD in battery production accounts for 42.0% of the overall battery cost
reduction during 2014–2020. The feedback loop from LBD amplified the effects of EV subsidies
and local content requirements on EV adoption and social welfare by severalfold. Upstream battery
suppliers capture a small fraction of the benefits generated by LBD, highlighting the potential role
of government interventions to address LBD underprovision.
In terms of policy implications, EV subsidies in one country generate spillover benefits for
other countries, with the extent of these spillovers critically depending on the nature of the sup-
ply network and the degree of supplier overlap. By shifting demand to domestic battery producers,
China’s whitelist policy accelerated learning among Chinese suppliers at the expense of others. The
timing of policy implementation is crucial: if China had delayed the policy by five years, its effec-
tiveness in helping Chinese suppliers gain a global competitive advantage would have diminished
significantly, and its domestic welfare impact would have shifted from positive to negative.
We conclude by highlighting two directions for future research. First, our analysis abstracts
from market entry and production location decisions of automakers and battery suppliers, which
are critical for understanding the impacts of local content requirements recently implemented in
the U.S. and Europe. Head et al. (2024) makes important headway in that direction by developing
a multi-stage production model, albeit without incorporating LBD. Second, we do not explicitly
account for the impacts on the gasoline vehicle segment. How the EV policies affect this segment
through substitution and product line choices remains an open question.
References
Allcott, Hunt, Reigner Kane, Maximilian S Maydanchik, Joseph S Shapiro, and Felix Tintelnot. 2024. “The
Effects of “Buy American”: Electric Vehicles and the Inflation Reduction Act.” Working Paper 33032,
34


===== [PAGE 37] =====

National Bureau of Economic Research.
Argote, Linda and Dennis Epple. 1990. “Learning Curves in Manufacturing.” Science 247 (4945):920–924.
Arrow, Kenneth Joseph. 1962. “Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention.” In Readings
in industrial economics: Volume two: Private enterprise and state intervention. Springer, 219–236.
Axsen, Jonn, Joseph Bailey, and Marisol Andrea Castro. 2015.
“Preference and lifestyle heterogeneity
among potential plug-in electric vehicle buyers.” Energy Economics 50:190–201.
Banares-Sanchez, Ignacio, Robin Burgess, David Laszlo, Pol Simpson, John Van Reenen, and Yifan Wang.
2024. “Chinese Innovation, Green Industrial Policy and the Rise of Solar Energy.” Working Paper.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Shengmao Cao, and Shanjun Li. 2021. “Local Protectionism, Market Structure, and
Social Welfare: China’s Automobile Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 13 (4):112–
51.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Hyuk-Soo Kwon, and Shanjun Li. 2024. “Attribute-based Subsidies and Market Power:
an Application to Electric Vehicles.” Working Paper 32264, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Hyuk-Soo Kwon, Shanjun Li, Yucheng Wang, and Nahim Bin Zahur. 2024. “Industrial
Policies and Innovation: Evidence from the Global Automobile Industry.” Working Paper 33138, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Hyuk-soo Kwon, Binglin Wang, and Nahim Bin Zahur. 2023. “Pass-through of Electric
Vehicle Subsidies: A Global Analysis.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 113:323–28.
Benkard, C. Lanier, Przemyslaw Jeziorski, and Gabriel Y. Weintraub. 2015. “Oblivious equilibrium for
concentrated industries.” Rand Journal of Economics 46(4).
Benkard, Lanier. 2000. “Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of Aircraft Production.” American Eco-
nomic Review 90 (4):1034–1054.
———. 2004. “A Dynamic Analysis of the Market for Wide-bodied Commercial Aircraft.” Review of
Economic Studies 71:581–611.
Berry, Steven T., James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium.”
Econometrica 63 (4):841–890.
Bhutad, Govind. 2021.
“Visualizing the Freefall in Electric Vehicle Battery Prices.”
Visual Capitalist
Https://elements.visualcapitalist.com/electric-vehicle-battery-prices-fall/.
Bjerkan, Kristin Ystmark, Tom E Nørbech, and Marianne Elvsaas Nordtømme. 2016. “Incentives for pro-
moting battery electric vehicle (BEV) adoption in Norway.” Transportation Research Part D: Transport
and Environment 43:169–180.
Bloomberg
NEF.
2023.
“BloombergNEF
Annual
Battery
Price
Survey.”
Https://about.bnef.com/blog/lithium-ion-battery-pack-prices-hit-record-low-of-139-kwh/.
Bollinger, Bryan, Kenneth Gillingham, Todd Gerarden, Drew Vollmer, and Daniel Xu. 2024. “Strategic
Avoidance and Welfare Impacts of Solar Panel Tariffs.” Working Paper.
Cabral, Luis MB and Michael H Riordan. 1994. “The learning curve, market dominance, and predatory
pricing.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society :1115–1140.
Chipty, Tasneem and Christopher M. Snyder. 1999. “The Role of Firm Size in Bilateral Bargaining: A Study
of the Cable Television Industry.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (2):326–340.
CMT. 2022. “Vehicle Miles Traveled in Urban and Rural China.” Tech. rep., Chinese Ministry of Transport.
Conlon, Christopher and Jeff Gortmaker. 2023. “Incorporating Micro Data into Differentiated Products
Demand Estimation with PyBLP.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Co¸sar, A Kerem, Paul LE Grieco, Shengyu Li, and Felix Tintelnot. 2018. “What drives home market advan-
tage?” Journal of international economics 110:135–150.
35


===== [PAGE 38] =====

Covert, Thomas R. and Richard L. Sweeney. 2022. “Winds of Change: Estimating Learning by Doing
without Cost or Input Data.” Working paper.
Crawford, Gregory S, Robin S Lee, Michael D Whinston, and Ali Yurukoglu. 2018. “The welfare effects of
vertical integration in multichannel television markets.” Econometrica 86 (3):891–954.
Crawford, Gregory S. and Ali Yurukoglu. 2012. “The Welfare Effects of Bundling in Multichannel Television
Markets.” American Economic Review 102 (2):643–85.
Dasgupta, Partha and Joseph Stiglitz. 1988. “Learning-by-Doing, Market Structure and Industrial and Trade
Policies.” Oxford Economic Papers, New Series 40(2):246–268.
Deng, Shanglyu, Dun Jia, Mario Leccese, and Andrew Sweeting. 2024. “Bargaining and Dynamic Compe-
tition.” Working Paper .
Dorn, Jacob. 2024. “Dynamic Bargaining between Hospitals and Insurers.” Working Paper .
Draganska, Michaela, Daniel Klapper, and Sofia B. Villas-Boas. 2010. “A Larger Slice or a Larger Pie? An
Empirical Investigation of Bargaining Power in the Distribution Channel.” Marketing Science 29 (1):57–
74.
EPA. 2021. “Motor Vehicle Emissions Simulator (MOVES).” Tech. rep., U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
Eurostat. 2020. “Passenger Mobility Statistics in the European Union.” Tech. rep., Eurostat.
Fan, Ying and Chenyu Yang. 2020. “Competition, Product Proliferation, and Welfare: A Study of the US
Smartphone Market.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 12 (2):99–134.
FHWA. 2022. “Annual Vehicle Miles Traveled in the United States.” Tech. rep., Federal Highway Adminis-
tration (FHWA).
Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole. 1991. Game Theory. MIT Press.
Gandhi, Amit and Jean-François Houde. 2019. “Measuring substitution patterns in differentiated products
industries.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gerarden, Todd D. 2023.
“Demanding Innovation: The Impact of Consumer Subsidies on Solar Panel
Production Costs.” Management Science 69 (12):7799–7820.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K, Réka Juhász, Nathan J Lane, Giulia Lo Forte, and Jeff Thurk. 2024. “Industrial Policy
in the Global Semiconductor Sector.” Working Paper 32651, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Frank Verboven. 2001. “The evolution of price dispersion in the European
car market.” The Review of Economic Studies 68 (4):811–848.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Vivian Ho, and Robert J Town. 2006.
“Causality, learning and forgetting in
surgery.” Working Paper.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Aviv Nevo, and Robert Town. 2015. “Mergers When Prices Are Negotiated: Evi-
dence from the Hospital Industry.” American Economic Review 105 (1):172–203.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam and Marc Rysman. 2012.
“Dynamics of Consumer Demand for New Durable
Goods.” Journal of Political Economy 120 (6):1173–1219.
Grennan, Matthew. 2013. “Price Discrimination and Bargaining: Empirical Evidence from Medical De-
vices.” American Economic Review 103 (1):145–77.
Head, Keith. 1994. “Infant industry protection in the steel rail industry.” Journal of International Economics
37 (3):141–165.
Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer, Marc Melitz, and Chenying Yang. 2024. “Industrial policies for multi-stage
production: The battle for battery-powered vehicles.” Working Paper.
HEI. 2022. “State of Global Air Report.” Tech. rep., Health Effects Institute.
36


===== [PAGE 39] =====

Ho, Kate and Robin S. Lee. 2017. “Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets.” Econometrica 85 (2):379–
417.
Holland, Stephen, Erin Mansur, Nicholas Muller, and Andrew Yates. 2016.
“Are There Environmental
Benefits from Driving Electric Vehicles? The Importance of Local Factors.” American Economic Review
106 (12):3700–3729.
Horn, Henrick and Asher Wolinsky. 1988. “Bilateral Monopolies and Incentives for Merger.” The RAND
Journal of Economics 19 (3):408–419.
International Energy Agency. 2021.
“Global EV Outlook 2021.”
Tech. rep.,
IEA, Paris.
Https://www.iea.org/reports/global-ev-outlook-2021.
———. 2023. “Global EV Outlook 2023.” Https://www.iea.org/reports/global-ev-outlook-2023.
Irwin, Douglas A. and Peter J. Klenow. 1994. “Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the Semiconductor Indus-
try.” Journal of Political Economy 102 (6):1200–1227.
KTI. 2023. “Annual Vehicle Miles Traveled in South Korea and Japan.” Tech. rep., Korea Transportation
Institute.
Küpper, Daniel, Kristian Kuhlmann, Sebastian Wolf, Cornelius Pieper, Gang Xu, and Justin Ahmad. 2018.
“The Future of Battery Production for Electric Vehicles.” Boston Consulting Group Working Paper .
Leard, Benjamin, Joshua Linn, and Katalin Springel. 2024. “Vehicle Attribute Tradeoffs and the Distribu-
tional Effects of US Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards.” Working Paper.
Lee, Robin S. and Kyna Fong. 2013. “Markov-Perfect Network Formation: An Applied Framework for
Bilateral Oligopoly and Bargaining in Buyer-Seller Networks.” Working Paper .
Li, Jing. 2023. “Compatibility and Investment in the U.S. Electric Vehicle Market.” Working paper.
Li, Shanjun. 2018. “Better lucky than rich? Welfare analysis of automobile license allocations in Beijing
and Shanghai.” Review of Economic Studies 85 (4):2389–2428.
Li, Shanjun, Lang Tong, Jianwei Xing, and Yiyi Zhou. 2017. “The Market for Electric Vehicles: Indi-
rect Network Effects and Policy Impacts.” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
Economists 4 (1):89–133.
Li, Shanjun, Xianglei Zhu, Yiding Ma, Fan Zhang, and Hui Zhou. 2021. “The Role of Government in the
Market for Electric Vehicles: Evidence from China.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management .
Liang, Jing and Junji Xiao. 2024. “The Incidence and Distributional Effects of Electric Vehicle Subsidies in
China.” Working Paper.
Lohawala, Nofisa. 2023. “Roadblock or Accelerator? The Effect of Electric Vehicle Subsidy Elimination.”
RFF Working Paper.
Meijssen, Aart. 2019. “Dutch electric vehicle drivers’ preferences regarding vehicle-to-grid contracts.” TU
Delft, Delft .
Melitz, Marc. 2005. “When and How Should Infant Industries Be Protected?”
Journal of International
Economics 66:177–196.
Muehlegger, Erich and David S. Rapson. 2022. “Subsidizing low- and middle-income adoption of electric
vehicles: Quasi-experimental evidence from California.” Journal of Public Economics 216:104752.
Ohashi, Hiroshi. 2005. “Learning by doing, export subsidies, and industry growth: Japanese steel in the
1950s and 1960s.” Journal of International Economics 66 (2):297–323.
Okada, Takanori, Tetsuya Tamaki, and Shunsuke Managi. 2019. “Effect of environmental awareness on
purchase intention and satisfaction pertaining to electric vehicles in Japan.” Transportation Research Part
D: Transport and Environment 67:503–513.
Plötz, Patrick, Till Gnann, Martin Kagerbauer, and Michael Heilig. 2017. “Can models predict electric
37


===== [PAGE 40] =====

vehicle users?” .
Remmy, Kevin. 2022. “Adjustable product attributes, indirect network effects, and subsidy design: The case
of electric vehicles.” Working Paper.
Rennert,Kevin and Others. 2022. “Comprehensive evidence implies a higher social cost of CO2.” Nature
September:687–692.
Ritchie, Hannah. 2021. “The price of batteries has declined by 97% in the last three decades.” Our World in
Data Https://ourworldindata.org/battery-price-decline.
Sheu, Gloria and Charles Taragin. 2021. “Simulating mergers in a vertical supply chain with bargaining.”
Rand Journal of Economics 52(3):596–632.
Springel, Katalin. 2019. “Network Externality and Subsidy Structure in Two-Sided Markets: Evidence from
Electric Vehicle Incentives.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 13 (4):393–432.
Thompson, Peter. 2001. “How Much Did the Liberty Shipbuilders Learn? New Evidence for an Old Case
Study.” Journal of Political Economy 109 (1):103–137.
———. 2010. “Learning by Doing.” In Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, vol. 1, edited by Bron-
wyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg. Amsterdam: Elsevier/North-Holland, 429–476.
———. 2012. “The Relationship between Unit Cost and Cumulative Quantity and the Evidence for Organi-
zational Learning-by-Doing.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26 (3):203–24.
Thornton, Rebecca Achee and Peter Thompson. 2001. “Learning from Experience and Learning from Oth-
ers: An Exploration of Learning and Spillovers in Wartime Shipbuilding.” American Economic Review
91 (5):1350–1368.
USTR. 2019. “United States Trade Representative 2018 Report to Congress On China’s WTO Compliance.”
Vassileva, Iana and Javier Campillo. 2017. “Adoption barriers for electric vehicles: Experiences from early
adopters in Sweden.” Energy 120:632–641.
Villas-Boas, Sofia Berto. 2007. “Vertical relationships between manufacturers and retailers: Inference with
limited data.” The Review of Economic Studies 74 (2):625–652.
Walter, Daan, Kingsmill Bond, Sam Butler-Sloss, Laurens Speelman, Yuki Numata, and Will Atkinson.
2023. “X-Change: Batteries – The Battery Domino Effect.” Https://rmi.org/insight/x-change-batteries-
the-battery-domino-effect.
Wang, Jingyuan and Jianwei Xing. 2024. “Subsidizing Industry Growth in a Market with Lemons:Evidence
from the Chinese Electric Vehicle Market.” Working Paper.
Wright, Theodore P. 1936. “Factors affecting the cost of airplanes.” Journal of the Aeronautical Sciences
3 (4):122–128.
Xing, Jianwei, Benjamin Leard, and Shanjun Li. 2021. “What Does an Electric Vehicle Replace?” Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management 107:102432.
Ziegler, Micah S. and Jessica E. Trancik. 2021. “Re-examining rates of lithium-ion battery technology
improvement and cost decline.” Energy & Environmental Science 14:1635–1651.
38


===== [PAGE 41] =====

Figures & Tables
Figure 1: Vehicle Price and Battery Supplier Experience
(a) Residualized Prices Over Time
(b) Residualized Prices vs. Supplier Experience
Notes: The residualized vehicle prices in Panels (a) and (b) are EV prices partialling out vehicle attributes (horsepower,
size, and the PHEV dummy), and country, brand, and year fixed effects. In Panel (a), the price residuals are divided
by battery capacity as a proxy for battery costs per kWh, and the purple dots depict the sales-weighted average annual
price residuals per kWh (in $1000). The red diamonds are the average battery pack price from Bloomberg NEF (2023)
(BNEF). The residualized price is scaled so that it coincides with the BNEF battery pack price in 2014. The marker
size is proportional to the total EV sales in a given year. The binned scatter plot in Panel (b) shows the residualized
prices (in $1000) against the cumulative experience of battery suppliers. The size of the dots is proportional to the
cumulative subsidy received by battery suppliers.
Figure 2: China’s Whitelist Policy
(a) Domestic Sourcing of Batteries
(b) Battery sales
Notes: The two dotted vertical lines depict the timing of China’s whitelist policy. Panel (a) shows the share of EV
models sourcing from Chinese battery suppliers separately for EV models sold in China (red solid line, left y-axis)
and those sold elsewhere (blue dashed line, right y-axis). Panel (b) shows the growth of (average) experience of
battery suppliers over time separately for the top two Chinese suppliers (BYD and CATL) and the leading non-Chinese
suppliers (AESC, Panasonic, LG, and Samsung).
39


===== [PAGE 42] =====

Figure 3: Battery Export Prices
Notes: This figure shows the free-on-board battery price ($/kWh) by country-of-origin from UN Comtrade. The price
unit in UN Comtrade was $/liter, which we transform to $/kWh based on the average energy density for each year. The
two dotted vertical lines depict the timing of China’s whitelist policy.
Figure 4: Demand Elasticities
(a) Price Elasticity
(b) Semi-elasticity When Price Drops by $1000
Notes: Panel (a) shows the histogram of price elasticities. The average is 3.48. The demand elasticity is less than
one (in absolute value) for 60 out of 4,556 observations. Given the multi-product nature of auto firms, only eight of
the 60 observations exhibit negative marginal costs. Panel (b) depicts the binned scatter plot for semi-elasticities (the
percentage change in sales for a $1,000 reduction in own prices) by country group. The sales-weighted average semi-
elasticity is 10.2% for China and varies from 6.3% to 7.5% for other country groups. The increase in the percentage of
sales is more pronounced for cheaper vehicles, implying more elastic demand.
40


===== [PAGE 43] =====

Figure 5: LBD and Battery Price Reduction
(a) Global
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Year
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Price, 1000$/kWh
Battery price (only time trend)
Battery price (learning + trend)
Battery price
Battery price (BNEF index)
(b) By Country
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Year
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
Battery cost, 1000$/kWh
China
Japan
Korea
Notes: in Panel (a), the black line with triangles shows prices based on the time trend (technological progress), and the
blue line with diamonds (the second line from the top) reflects the combined price reductions due to both LBD and the
time trend. The red line with diamonds (the third line from the top) is model-predicted battery prices, and the green line
with circles shows the Bloomberg New Energy Finance (BNEF) battery price index. The differences are partly driven
by coverage: we focus on passenger EVs, whereas BNEF index is based on survey data that also covers commercial
vehicles and storage batteries. Panel (b) shows the reduction in sales-weighted average battery prices that correspond
to the learning component γ0EbtγE. The line with red triangles represents battery costs for BYD & CATL in China, the
line with black circles stands for LG & Samsung in South Korea, and the line with blue squares stands for Panasonic
& AESC in Japan. Chinese battery suppliers had higher costs initially but experienced a faster reduction over time and
closed the gap with their rivals by 2020.
Figure 6: Effect of Subsidies and LBD on Global EV Sales
Notes: This figure illustrates total EV sales across the top 13 EV countries under various scenarios. The solid black
line at the top represents observed EV sales with both LBD and consumer subsidies in effect. The second dashed green
line shows EV sales with LBD but no subsidies, while the third dash-dot orange line represents EV sales with subsidies
but no LBD. The dotted blue line at the bottom shows EV sales with neither LBD nor subsidies. LBD greatly amplifies
the sales-expansion effect of subsidies.
41


===== [PAGE 44] =====

Table 1: Summary Statistics
BEVs
PHEVs
# of Obs.
Mean
Std. Dev.
# of Obs.
Mean
Std. Dev.
Panel A: Vehicle Information
Sales
2,325
2886.7
9861.9
2,231
1343.8
3803.6
MSRP ($1,000)
2,325
45.12
28.26
2,231
71.93
33.68
Subsidy ($1,000)
2,325
4.72
4.57
2,231
1.94
2.09
Volume (m3)
2,325
12.49
3.63
2,231
13.80
1.95
Horsepower
2,325
156.84
116.33
2,231
212.25
82.60
Driving Range (km)
2,325
171.19
79.95
2,231
31.46
24.61
Panel B: Battery Information
Battery Capacity (kWh)
2,325
41.95
22.11
2,231
11.53
3.59
Chemistry: NMC
2,325
0.629
0.483
2,231
0.949
0.219
Chemistry: LFP
2,325
0.045
0.208
2,231
0.006
0.076
Chemistry: NCA
2,325
0.100
0.300
2,231
0.002
0.042
Panel C: Battery Supplier Information
Production Experience (# EV supplied)
204
86,672
199,272
Median Plant Capacity (GWh)
204
1.03
3.05
Cumulative Patents
204
542.6
1,437.0
Panel D: Market-level Information
Lithium Price Index (100 in 2011)
104
190.09
75.24
Notes: The sample covers 13 countries with the largest EV sales in the world from 2013 to 2020: Austria, Canada,
China, France, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK, and the U.S. All prices
are in nominal U.S. dollars ($). The three major battery chemistry types are: NMC, Nickel Manganese Cobalt; LFP,
Lithium Iron Phosphate; and NCA, Nickel Cobalt Aluminum Oxide. The production capacity is the median capacity
across all plants operated by a battery supplier (a supplier has three plants on average). The lithium price is an index
normalized to 100 in 2011 and is collected from COMTRADE for China and Europe, USGS for the U.S., and from
Benchmark Mineral Intelligence for other countries.
42


===== [PAGE 45] =====

Table 2: Demand Parameters
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS logit
IV logit
Full model
Coef.
S.E.
Coef.
S.E.
Coef.
S.E.
Linear Parameters
Consumer Price (α1)
-0.015
0.002
-0.056
0.009
-0.011
0.009
PHEV
4.751
0.880
4.777
0.891
4.412
0.951
log(volume)
-0.665
0.233
0.809
0.409
1.453
0.410
log(HP)
0.275
0.155
1.202
0.275
1.166
0.272
log(range)
1.216
0.162
0.908
0.183
1.019
0.193
log(range) x PHEV
-0.789
0.204
-0.876
0.209
-0.643
0.216
EV home bias
0.879
0.126
0.774
0.126
0.782
0.147
Non-linear Price Coefficients (αc/yi)
α2 for China
-
-
-
-
-0.339
0.015
α2 for JP/SP/FR/DE
-
-
-
-
-0.216
0.021
α2 for UK/NL/AT/SE
-
-
-
-
-1.378
0.123
α2 for CA/NO/US/CH
-
-
-
-
-0.750
0.030
Random Coefficients (σ)
Constant
-
-
-
-
0.433
0.040
log(volume)
-
-
-
-
0.061
0.011
log(HP)
-
-
-
-
0.034
0.004
log(range)
-
-
-
-
0.045
0.007
Consumer price
-
-
-
-
0.148
0.009
Fixed Effects
Market (country x year)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
EV brand
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Car type
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Notes: The demand estimation is based on annual sales by vehicle model by country in the top 13 EV countries from
2013 to 2020. The number of observations is 4,556. “EV home bias” is a dummy equal to 1 if the brand is produced
by an automaker whose headquarters are located in the same country as the consumer. Columns (1) and (2) report
results for the OLS and 2SLS-logit regressions, respectively. Price instruments include six battery supplier dummies
interacted with battery capacity, as well as three Gandhi-Houde IVs based on vehicle attributes. Column (3) is the
random coefficient multinomial logit model and is estimated using simulated GMM with nine macro IVs and 104
micro-moments. The price coefficient αi is specified as α1 +
αc(i)
yi +σpν p
i , where yi is consumer income and ν p
i is the
unobserved preference shock (i.i.d. log-normal draws). All regressions include country by year, brand, and car type
fixed effects. The standard errors are clustered at the country by brand level.
43


===== [PAGE 46] =====

Table 3: Cost Parameters
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Battery Cost Parameters
Learning Parameter γE
-0.218
-0.151
-0.153
-0.140
(0.046)
(0.041)
(0.041)
(0.051)
γ0(1000$/kWh)
1.286
1.276
1.289
0.958
(0.219)
(0.18)
(0.181)
(0.172)
BK*Time Trend
-0.023
-0.022
-0.028
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.006)
BK*log(Plant Capacity)
0.023
-0.080
(0.043)
(0.035)
BK * Battery Chemistry Dummies
✓
✓
✓
✓
BK * Lithium Prices
✓
✓
✓
✓
Vehicle Cost Parameters
EV Experience
-1.104
(0.43)
PHEV
12.276
11.829
12.136
2.236
(2.004)
(2.056)
(2.118)
(1.094)
Horsepower
0.270
0.270
0.271
0.239
(0.011)
(0.01)
(0.011)
(0.007)
Volume
-2.966
-2.742
-2.849
0.729
(0.643)
(0.644)
(0.662)
(0.229)
Bargaining Parameter
Bargaining Weight, λ b
0.504
0.489
0.494
0.311
(0.066)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.104)
Fixed Effects
Country
✓
✓
✓
✓
EV Maker
✓
✓
✓
✓
Battery Supplier
✓
✓
✓
✓
Year
✓
✓
✓
✓
Notes: This table reports parameter estimates for Equation (8). The dependent variable (EV price minus EV markups) is
in $1,000. The number of observations is 4,556. All specifications use 2-step GMM estimation that instruments battery
supplier experience, battery markup (the variable corresponding to bargaining weight), and EV producer experience.
The marginal cost of battery pack is specified as: BKbjct
 γ0EγE
bt +CHbjctγ1+PKbtγ2+ηt

, where BK is battery capacity,
γE is the learning parameter, and γ0 captures the baseline cost with Ebt = 1. The regression has four sets of controls.
The first set includes variables relevant to batteries’ marginal cost: battery capacity interacted with battery chemistry
(NMC, NCA, LFP) and lithium prices (with the coefficient different for Chinese and non-Chinese EV models), battery
capacity interacted with a time trend (to capture industry-wise technological progress) and with production capacity
(to capture economies of scale). The second set includes vehicle attributes such as vehicle fuel type (BEV or PHEV),
vehicle size, horsepower, and EV producer experience (i.e., the logarithm of cumulative EV production by each EV
producer) to capture learning in EV manufacturing. The third set of controls is battery suppliers’ markups (with equal
bargain weights). The last set of controls includes country, EV maker, battery supplier, and year fixed effects.
44


===== [PAGE 47] =====

Table 4: Cost Parameters: Robustness Checks and Additional Specifications
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
BK*Year
Firm-Level
Portfolio
Spillovers
FEs
Patent Stock
Bargaining
Battery Cost Parameters
Learning Parameter γE
-0.159
-0.132
-0.143
-0.182
(0.036)
(0.057)
(0.052)
(0.091)
γ0(1000$/kWh)
1.529
0.955
0.992
1.039
(0.268)
(0.168)
(0.179)
(0.349)
Within-country Spillover, θ
0.034
(0.102)
BK*Time Trend
-0.019
-0.027
-0.021
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.006)
BK*log(Plant Capacity)
-0.122
-0.086
-0.080
-0.066
(0.036)
(0.035)
(0.035)
(0.034)
BK*log(Cumulative Patents)
-0.023
(0.013)
Vehicle Cost Parameters
EV Experience
-0.902
-1.297
-1.036
-1.195
(0.449)
(0.419)
(0.437)
(0.417)
PHEV
3.185
1.840
2.479
1.755
(1.137)
(1.071)
(1.126)
(1.082)
Horsepower
0.239
0.234
0.248
0.237
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
Volume
0.487
0.649
0.827
0.799
(0.234)
(0.223)
(0.236)
(0.225)
Bargaining Parameter
Bargaining Weight, λ b
0.337
0.381
0.300
0.330
(0.099)
(0.077)
(0.131)
(0.099)
BK*Chemistry+BK*Lithium+All FE
✓
✓
✓
✓
Notes: This table reports cost estimates under alternative specifications. The baseline estimates are in Column (4) of
Table 3. Relative to the baseline, Column (1) includes BK* year fixed effects, instead of BK* a time trend. Column
(2) controls for firm-level innovation by the (log) number of cumulative patents since 2008. We instrument for the
patent variable using the battery firm’s exposure to industrial policies targeting the EV sector across countries as well
as its interaction with battery capacity. Column (3) modifies the disagreement payoff: if an upstream and downstream
firm pair fails to reach an agreement for any one product, all products that they bargain over are withdrawn from
the market. Column (4) allows within-country across-firm learning spillovers, where the experience of rival firms
in the same country is scaled by θ. We instrument for rival experience using predicted rival experience constructed
based on Equation (9). Estimation of all specifications is done analogously to that in Table 3, and all specifications
include country, battery supplier, EV maker, and year fixed effects, as well as battery capacity interacted with chemistry
dummies and lithium prices.
45


===== [PAGE 48] =====

Table 5: Impact of Consumer Subsidies
China
Europe
JP & KR
N. America
Global
Panel (a): Impact of US Subsidies
∆Welfare ($ bn.)
0.38
2.43
7.31
9.58
19.70
∆Consumer Surplus (+)
0.22
1.23
0.05
15.02
16.52
∆Battery Variable Profit (+)
-0.34
-
6.09
-
5.75
∆EV Variable Profit (+)
0.47
1.72
1.18
8.61
11.98
∆Gov’t Expenditure (−)
-0.03
0.52
0.01
14.05
14.55
∆EV Sales
14,847
67,294
2,822
839,574
924,537
Panel (b): Impact of European Subsidies
∆Welfare ($ bn.)
0.73
2.93
7.54
2.97
14.17
∆Consumer Surplus (+)
0.21
16.45
0.06
1.40
18.12
∆Battery Variable Profit (+)
-0.17
-
5.42
-
5.27
∆EV Variable Profit (+)
0.63
4.90
2.07
2.15
9.75
∆Gov’t Expenditure (−)
-0.06
18.44
0.01
0.59
18.97
∆EV Sales
15,209
871,074
3,449
81,778
971,511
Panel (c): Impact of Chinese Subsidies
∆Welfare ($ bn.)
39.44
1.72
-0.28
1.73
42.62
∆Consumer Surplus (+)
36.64
1.44
0.02
0.77
38.87
∆Battery Variable Profit (+)
12.10
-
-0.63
-
11.46
∆EV Variable Profit (+)
22.64
0.81
0.33
1.28
25.06
∆Gov’t Expenditure (−)
31.93
0.53
0.00
0.31
32.77
∆EV Sales
4,403,391
64,565
1,530
44,219
4,513,704
Notes: This table reports the aggregated impact (2013-2020) of consumer subsidies on social welfare and EV adoption
separately for China, Europe, Japan & South Korea, and North America (US and Canada). Panel (a) estimates the
effect of US subsidies by comparing scenarios with and without these subsidies, holding consumer subsidies in China
and Europe constant. Panels (b) and (c) are constructed analogously.
46


===== [PAGE 49] =====

Table 6: Impact of China’s Whitelist Policy
China
Europe
JP & KR
N. America
Global
∆Welfare ($ bn.)
5.41
-0.72
-5.24
-1.69
-2.23
∆Consumer Surplus (+)
-0.24
-0.72
-0.02
-0.87
-1.85
∆Battery Variable Profit (+)
4.36
-
-5.01
-
-0.66
∆EV Variable Profit (+)
0.45
-0.34
-0.21
-1.19
-1.29
∆Gov’t Expenditure (−)
-0.85
-0.34
0.00
-0.37
-1.56
∆EV Sales
7,848
-41,744
-1,239
-51,044
-86,179
Notes: This table shows the aggregate impact (2013-2020) of China’s whitelist policy on social welfare and EV adop-
tion separately for China, Europe, Japan & South Korea, and North America (US and Canada). It estimates the impact
of China’s 2016-2019 whitelist policy by comparing scenarios with and without the whitelist policy, holding consumer
subsidies in China, the EU, and the U.S. constant.
Table 7: Impact of China’s Counterfactual (Delayed) Whitelist Policy
China
Europe
JP & KR
N. America
Global
∆Welfare ($ bn.)
-1.29
-0.47
-1.96
-0.42
-4.13
∆Consumer Surplus (+)
-3.39
-0.18
0.00
-0.10
-3.68
∆Battery Variable Profit (+)
0.66
-
-1.78
-
-1.13
∆EV Variable Profit (+)
-1.40
-0.37
-0.17
-0.36
-2.31
∆Gov’t Expenditure (−)
-2.85
-0.09
0.00
-0.04
-2.98
∆EV Sales
-303,293
-10,817
-245
-6,178
-320,533
Notes: This analysis evaluates the timing of China’s whitelist policy. The table reports the aggregate impacts (2013-
2025) on social welfare and EV adoption of a counterfactual whitelist policy implemented in 2021-2024 rather than
2016-2019 (as in the data). Impacts are estimated by comparing scenarios with and without the counterfactual policy,
holding consumer subsidies in China, the EU, and the U.S. constant.
Table 8: LBD and Policy Interactions
($ bn.)
World
China
Rest of World
With LBD
∆Welfare, Chinese Subsidies
42.62
39.44
3.18
∆Welfare, Whitelist
-2.23
5.41
-7.64
Without LBD
∆Welfare, Chinese Subsidies
5.86
5.26
0.60
∆Welfare, Whitelist
-0.16
0.63
-0.79
Notes: This table shows the aggregate welfare impact (2013-2020) of China’s consumer subsidies and the whitelist
policy with and without LBD. In the scenario without LBD, we set firms’ experience as the initial experience in the
sample.
47


===== [PAGE 50] =====

Online Appendix
Drive Down the Cost: Learning by Doing and Government
Policies in the Global EV Battery Industry
Panle Jia Barwick
Hyuk-soo Kwon
Shanjun Li
Nahim Bin Zahur
A
Data Construction and Industry Details
A.1
Battery Plant Capacity
Data on battery suppliers’ plants are compiled from the 2022 lithium-ion battery gigafactory database
by Automotive Logistics (AL) and market reports from Marklines1. The AL dataset provides de-
tailed plant characteristics by year and region, including manufacturing start year, capacity in 2022,
predicted capacity from 2023-2030, and city-level location. As of 2022, there are 204 battery cell
plants in Asia Pacific with a total capacity of 703 GWh, 73 cell plants in Europe with a total ca-
pacity of 160 GWh, and 48 cell plants in North America with a total capacity of 95 GWh. The
Marklines reports offer production capacity data from 2018-2021 for the top ten Chinese cell sup-
pliers (CATL, LG Energy, Panasonic, Findreams/BYD, EVE, CALB, Gotion High-tech, Farasis
Energy, SVOLT, and Sunwoda). We manually merged these two data sources. For plants with
missing capacity information, we supplemented the data by searching online news reports. The
following table illustrates the data collection process: The completed battery capacity dataset con-
Table A1: Examples of Battery Plant Capacity Collection
Plant Name
Cell Supplier
News Report
Start Year
Capacity
2022 (GWh)
Address
CATL Yibin
manufacturing
site (1st and
2nd phase)
CATL
CATL has completed the first expansion stage of its battery cell plant in the city of Yibin in
southwest China’s Sichuan Province, for which it has already commissioned the equipment.
The company puts the annual capacity of the completed section at 15 GWh. After completing
the second construction phase in two years as planned, the annual production capacity is ex-
pected to total 30 GWh. CATL indicates that a total of six phases of the project are planned...
2021
30
Yibin,
Sichuan
Panasonic-
Tesla
Panasonic
Today a portion of Tesla’s vision became reality, with Panasonic and Tesla beginning produc-
tion of their “2170” cylindrical lithium-ion batteries at their “Gigafactory” in Reno, Nevada.
These cells will be used in Tesla’s Powerwall 2 and Powerpack 2 battery products, as well as
its Model 3 EVs. Tesla notes that production for qualification began in December at the Gi-
gafactory, which when complete will be the largest factory on earth. The mammoth building
is being completed in phases so that production can being inside finished sections and expand
later, and by 2018 the company expects the facility to be making 35 gigawatt-hours per year
of battery cells...
2016
35
Reno, Nevada
tains 263 plants of 99 cell suppliers ranging from 1992 to 2023. The top 10 cell suppliers by total
capacity are CATL, BYD, SVOLT, LG Energy, CALB, EVE Energy, Panasonic, AESC, Gotion
High-tech, Farasis, which account for 83.04% of global battery capacity.
1See: Automotive Logistic and Markline Analysis Report.
A-1


===== [PAGE 51] =====

A.2
Income Distribution
The World Inequality Database (WID) provides annual data on three key metrics for most coun-
tries: (1) average income, (2) the income share of the bottom 50% (p0-p50), and (3) the income
share of the top 10% (p90-p100). Using these statistics, we calibrate the location and dispersion
parameters of the Lognormal distribution, Lognormal(µm,σm) for each market m (a country-year
pair). First, we express µm as a function of σm by matching the mean of the Lognormal distribution,
exp(µm + σ2
m/2), to the average income reported by WID for the market. We then determine σm
(and consequently µm(σm)) by minimizing the following objective function:
(predicted p0-p50−observed p0-p50)2 +(predicted p90-p100−observed p90-p100)2.
A.3
IV Construction for Battery Experience
We construct the battery experience IV with Equation (9): IVbt = ∑s<t ∑j ˆPr jbcs(z jbcs) ˆq jcs(Xjcs,φjcs).
This has two components: (1) the probability that EV model j sold in country c at time s chooses
battery supplier b and (2) predicted sales of model j. We use the demand model in Section 3 to
generate predicted sales ˆq jcs, as explained in the main text. Here we discuss how we predict the
probability that model j chooses supplier b: ˆPr jbcs.
EV models rarely switch battery suppliers during our sample. We assume that an EV maker
selects a battery supplier (from a choice set that includes all battery suppliers active in that country)
during the year when an EV model is first released in a given country. The unit of analysis is an EV
model and battery supplier pair by country and model-release-year. We allow EV makers to choose
different battery suppliers for the same EV model sold in different countries.2 This is because
batteries are expensive to transport and it may be cost-efficient to source from nearby production
facilities. In addition, EV makers may choose domestic battery suppliers to satisfy domestic content
requirements.
We use a logit model where the outcome variable is one if an EV model chooses a supplier and
zero otherwise. We only use variables that are likely uncorrelated with cost shocks ωjct as controls.
They include a dummy variable for China’s whitelist policy (that equals one for EVs in China and
if the supplier is a Chinese firm from 2016-2019, and 0 otherwise), a home bias dummy (that equals
one if the supplier-automaker pair has the same country of origin), dummies for supplier-automaker
pairs that are vertically integrated (BYD - BYD and AESC - RNM), the initial supply network (a
dummy that equals one if the supplier-automaker pair had a supply relationship at the beginning of
the sample period), a dummy for whether the initial supply relationship was in the same country
2For example, Hyundai’s Kia K5 model in 2018 used CATL batteries for the model sold in China but batteries from
LG for the model sold in other countries.
A-2


===== [PAGE 52] =====

as the one where the EV is produced and age of each supplier. We also control for a supplier’s
characteristics in the initial year: average battery capacity, the most common chemistry of batteries
produced, and the average number of models for which the firm was a battery supplier. Finally,
we include interaction terms between initial supply-network links, supplier characteristics, and EV
characteristics (volume, horsepower, battery capacity, range, and battery chemistry).
A.4
Battery Supply Agreements
Battery makers sell batteries to EV producers using battery supply agreements. These agreements
are confidential and the exact details of the contracts (e.g., the agreed battery price) are not publicly
known. Redacted copies of a few contracts, however, have been published by the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission, including, notably, a 2009 battery supply agreement signed between
Tesla and Panasonic in 2009.3 The Tesla-Panasonic agreement was signed on June 2009 and had
an initial end date of December 2010. The end date was automatically extended every year by one
year, unless one of the parties chose to terminate the agreement. The contract specified a linear
price per every battery sold. The quantity (i.e., the number of batteries to order) was chosen on a
rolling basis by Tesla, though Tesla was required to provide advance notice to Panasonic, as well
as a non-binding, good faith forecast of how many batteries they expect to purchase in the next six
months. The 2007 Tesla-Sanyo agreement shared similar features.4 These features inform some of
our modeling choices: (1) battery suppliers and EV producers negotiate linear prices (as opposed
to two-part tariffs, or contracts that specify both price and quantity) (2) firms negotiate short-term
contracts where the price is only fixed for one year, as opposed to long-term contracts (since in the
observed agreements, either party can terminate the contract each year).
B
Modeling Details
B.1
Simultaneous Contracting and Pricing
Under the assumption of simultaneous contracting and pricing, bargaining over battery prices and
EV price setting happen simultaneously. Let dv,Simult and db,Simult denote the disagreement payoffs
for EV manufacturer v and battery supplier b, respectively. Then the equations characterizing the
Nash-in-Nash bargaining equilibrium (Equation (4)) can be written as:
3See https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1318605/000119312510017054/dex1033.
htm.
4See https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1318605/000119312510017054/dex1027.
htm.
A-3


===== [PAGE 53] =====

(1−λ b)(πb −db,Simult)
|
{z
}
b’s gains from trade
∂πv
∂τ j
+λ b (πv −dv,Simult)
|
{z
}
v’s gains from trade
∂πb
∂τj
= 0.
We now describe how we use the above bargaining FOCs as well as the FOCs characterizing down-
stream EV pricing to derive upstream markups as a function of downstream markups and bargaining
weight (equation (5)). This closely follows Draganska, Klapper, and Villas-Boas (2010).
Profits and Disagreement Payoffs
The profits for EV producer v and battery supplier b can be
written as:
πv(p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωv
(pk −τk −mcv
k)qk(p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωv
mkv
kqk(p,φ)
πb(p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωb
(τk −mcb
k)qk(p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωb
mkb
kqk(p,φ)
Their disagreement payoffs are:
dv,Simult(p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωv
(pk −τk −mcv
k) ˜qk(p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωv
mkv
k ˜qk(p,φ)
db,Simult(p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωb
(τk −mcb
k) ˜qk(p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωb
mkb
k ˜qk(p,φ),
when bargaining breaks down over the battery price for vehicle j (i.e., when there is a disagree-
ment), vehicle j is removed from the market, but all other vehicles are supplied at the same prices
as they would be under agreement. Here, note that ˜q j(p,φ) = 0 (since ˜q denotes the sales when
vehicle j is not offered).
Gains from Trade
The gains from trade for EV maker v can be written as:
πv −dv,Simult = ∑
k∈Ωv
mkv
k[qk(p,φ)−˜qk(p,φ)]
Likewise, the gains from trade for battery supplier b can be written as:
πb −db,Simult = ∑
k∈Ωb
mkb
k[qk(p,φ)−˜qk(p,φ)]
Profit Derivatives
The derivative of EV producer v’s profits with respect to the battery price for
vehicle j, τj, can be written as:
∂πv
∂τj
= −q j
This is because, under simultaneous contracting and pricing, an incremental change in the battery
price has no direct effect on downstream EV prices, so the derivatives of downstream EV prices
with respect to battery prices are zero. In a similar manner, the derivative of battery supplier b’s
A-4


===== [PAGE 54] =====

profits with respect to τj can be written as:
∂πb
∂τj
= qj
Upstream Markups
We now plug in the above expressions for the gains from trade and profit
derivatives into the bargaining FOC for the battery price for vehicle j:
(1−λ b)(πb −db,Simult)
|
{z
}
b’s gains from trade
(−q j)+λ b (πv −dv,Simult)
|
{z
}
v’s gains from trade
q j = 0
πb −db,Simult =
λ b
1−λ b(πv −dv,Simult)
We combine this FOC across different vehicles j to obtain the full vector of upstream markups as
a function of the vector of downstream markups. To facilitate this, we define a matrix S, whose
j,k term equals qk(p,φ) −˜qk(p,φ) (where recall that ˜qk(p,φ) equals the sales of vehicle k when
vehicle j is removed from the set of products offered). Let Tv denote the ownership matrix for
EV producers: T v(k,l) equals 1 if vehicles k and l are produced by the same EV producer and is 0
otherwise. Similarly, let Tb denote the ownership matrix for battery suppliers: T b(k,l) equals 1 if
the batteries for vehicles k and l are supplied by the same battery supplier, and is 0 otherwise.
In matrix form, the gains from trade to EV producers and battery suppliers can be respectively
written as:
πv
πv
πv −dv,Simult
dv,Simult
dv,Simult = (Tv ⊗S)mk
mk
mkv
πb
πb
πb −db,Simult
db,Simult
db,Simult = (Tb ⊗S)mk
mk
mkb,
where ⊗denotes element-by-element multiplication. Plugging these into the above bargaining
FOC, we obtain:
[Tb ⊗S]mk
mk
mkb =
λ b
1−λ b[Tv ⊗S]mk
mk
mkv
mk
mk
mkb =
λ b
1−λ b[Tb ⊗S]−1[Tv ⊗S]mk
mk
mkv,
which is the key estimation equation capturing how upstream markups are expressed as a function
of downstream markups.
B.2
Sequential Contracting and Pricing
In the sequential contracting and pricing game, EV makers and battery suppliers first negotiate
battery prices, after which EV makers set EV prices based on the observed battery prices. The
battery prices are determined to maximize the Nash product:
NPj(τ j,τ−j) = (πv −dv,Sequential)
|
{z
}
v’s gains from trade
(1−λ b) (πb −db,Sequential)
|
{z
}
b’s gains from trade
λ b
(A1)
A-5


===== [PAGE 55] =====

and the bargaining FOCs are the same as before. However, two changes arise in Equation (4) due
to the timing assumptions:
1. The disagreement profits dv,Sequential and db,Sequential depend on the new equilibrium down-
stream EV prices that would arise if EV model j is not offered; that is, downstream EV prices
are no longer constant under disagreement. The equilibrium downstream EV prices for all
EV models in the case of disagreement need to be re-calculated for every {v,b} pair.
2. The derivatives of downstream and upstream profits with respect to battery prices differ from
simultaneous contracting and pricing because firms anticipate that any change in the negoti-
ated battery price will result in a change in downstream EV prices.
Disagreement Payoffs
The disagreement payoffs for EV producer v and battery supplier b when
upstream bargaining and downstream price-setting happen sequentially are:
dv,Sequential(˜p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωv
( ˜pk −τk −mcv
k) ˜qk(˜p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωv
f
mk
v
k ˜qk(˜p,φ)
db,Sequential(˜p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωb
(τk −mcb
k) ˜qk(˜p,φ) = ∑
k∈Ωb
f
mk
b
k ˜qk(˜p,φ)
Here, ˜q, ˜p and f
mk represent the equilibrium EV sales, prices, and markups when product j is
excluded from the market.
Gains from Trade
The gains from trade for EV maker v from selling vehicle j are
πv −dv,Sequential = ∑
k∈Ωv
h
mkv
kqk(p,φ)−f
mk
v
k eqk(ep,φ)
i
Stacking these across vehicle models, we can write down the gains from trade to EV producers as:
πv
πv
πv −dv,Sequential
dv,Sequential
dv,Sequential = (Tv ⊗Mv)·l
Here, Mv captures the changes in profits due to a price change of vehicle k when there is disagree-
ment over the battery price for vehicle j (taking into account that the downstream prices for all
other vehicles will be adjusted upon disagreement), ⊗denotes element-by-element multiplication,
and l is a vector consisting entirely of ones. Similarly, the gains from trade for battery supplier b
from supplying batteries for EV model j are given by
πb −db
j = ∑
k∈Ωb
h
mkb
k(τ)qk(p)−mkb
k(τ)eqk(ep)
i
Stacking these across vehicle models, the gains from trade to battery suppliers can be expressed:
πb
πb
πb −db,Sequential
db,Sequential
db,Sequential = (Tb ⊗˜S)·mk
mk
mkb
A-6


===== [PAGE 56] =====

The j,k term of ˜S equals qk(p,φ) −˜qk(˜p,φ). ˜S therefore represents the changes in sales upon
disagreement, similar to the matrix S defined in the previous Section B.1, except that it takes into
account that downstream prices are reset upon disagreement.
Profit Derivatives
The derivative of the EV maker’s profit with respect to the battery price τj is:
∂πv
∂τj
= ∑
k∈Ωv
dπv
k
dτj
,
and in matrix form, this can be written as (Tv ⊗∆πv
τ )·l, where ∆πv
τ collects the derivatives of down-
stream profits with respect to upstream prices. Similarly, the derivative of the battery supplier’s
profit with respect to the battery price τj is given by:
∂πb
∂τj
= ∑
k∈Ωb
dπb
k
dτj
= ∑
k∈Ωb

1{k = j}·qk +mkb
k
dqk
dτj

,
which in matrix form becomes q+(Tb⊗∆q
τ)·mk
mk
mkb, where ∆q
τ collects the derivatives of downstream
sales with respect to battery prices.
Upstream Markup
Then, the bargaining FOC becomes:
(1−λ b)
h
(Tb ⊗˜S)·mk
mk
mkbi
⊗
h
(Tv ⊗∆πv
τ )·l
i
+λ b [(Tv ⊗Mv)·l]⊗
h
q +(Tb ⊗∆q
τ)·mk
mk
mkbi
= 0.
From this, we can derive upstream markups as follows:
mk
mk
mkb = −
(1−λ b)
λ b
·Xt ·(Tb ⊗˜S)+(Tb ⊗∆q
τ)
−1
·q,
(A2)
where Xt is a diagonal matrix defined as:
Xt = diag
h
(Tv ⊗∆πv
τ )·l
i
⊘[(Tv ⊗Mv)·l]

.
The notation ⊘denotes element-wise division. With the above expression for upstream markups (as
a function only of the bargaining weight λ b and quantities that can be calculated following demand
estimation, such as downstream markups) in hand, the supply-side estimation process follows the
steps as outlined in Section 4.2.
B.3
Linear Pricing
Here we describe the derivation of upstream markups in the simple linear pricing model (Villas-
Boas, 2007). In the first stage of this game, upstream battery suppliers simultaneously choose bat-
tery prices; and in the second stage, downstream EV producers simultaneously choose EV prices,
after observing the battery prices. Note that this is equivalent to the sequential contracting and
pricing model described above when λ b = 1, i.e., when upstream battery suppliers can make take-
it-or-leave-it offers to downstream EV producers. Setting λ b = 1 in Equation (A2), we obtain the
A-7


===== [PAGE 57] =====

following equation for upstream markups in the linear pricing model:
mk
mk
mkb = −(Tb ⊗∆q
τ)−1 ·q.
(A3)
B.4
Bargaining Model with Dynamic Considerations
We assume that battery suppliers are forward-looking while EV makers are myopic (and max-
imize current period profits). Battery suppliers and EV firms bargain over battery prices while
EV firms simultaneously choose EV markups to maximize their profits πv(p) = ∑j∈Ωv(p j −τj −
mcv
j)q j(p,φ). We make the assumption that EV producers choose markups (rather than prices) to
ensure that changes in negotiated battery prices directly affect EV prices (i.e., ∂pj
∂τj ̸= 0). These
price adjustments influence EV sales and, in turn, battery sales, which subsequently impact battery
suppliers’ experience and future production costs.5 In addition, firms assume that future markups
remain the same as the equilibrium markups in the current period, as we explain more below.
These assumptions capture the essence of LBD dynamic considerations in which upstream
suppliers use low prices to stimulate downstream demand while abstracting away modeling com-
plications that would make the problem intractable (including downstream firms’ incentives to
manipulate prices). An alternative assumption is that upstream battery price negotiations happen
first, followed by downstream EV pricing, i.e., a dynamic extension of the sequential contracting
and pricing model presented in Section B.2, but this alternative approach is less tractable.
Specifically, battery supplier b and EV producer v bargain over battery price τj to maximize the
following Nash product:
NPt(τjt,τ−jt) = (πv
t −dv
t )
|
{z
}
v’ gains
(1−λ b) (V b
t −Db
t )
|
{z
}
b’ gains
λ b.
(A4)
The downstream profits πv
t and deviation payoffs dv
t are the same as those in Equation (A1). On the
other hand, battery suppliers’ gains from trade are dynamic value functions that incorporate future
profit gains. Battery supplier b’s payoff upon agreement V b
t is defined as:
V b
t = ∑
k∈Ωbt
mkb
kt ·qkt(mkv
kt +mkb
kt +mckt)+
∞
∑
s=1
β s ∑
k∈Ωb
t+s
mkb
kt+s ·qkt+s(mkv
kt+s +mkb
kt+s +mckt+s),
(A5)
where mkv represents the downstream markup, mkb denotes the upstream markup, and mc is the
total marginal cost of production, consisting of marginal costs of producing batteries and non-
battery vehicle components (mcb + mcv). The equilibrium quantity q is determined by the final
5The preferred bargaining model in the main text (“Simultaneous Contracting and Pricing”) assumes that EV firms
choose prices (not markups). Under this assumption, battery suppliers have no direct influence on downstream prices
or sales, i.e., ∂p j
∂τj = 0. Consequently, battery firms cannot lower the negotiated battery price today to increase experi-
ence tomorrow.
A-8


===== [PAGE 58] =====

EV price, which is equal to mkv + mkb + mc.6 The second term in Equation (A5) is the present
discounted sum of future profits and reflects the battery supplier’s dynamic considerations. We set
the time discount rate β to 0.95. Battery supplier’s deviation payoff is defined as:
Db
t = ∑
k∈Ωbt
mkb
kt · eqkt(mkv
kt +mkb
kt +mckt)+
∞
∑
s=1
β s ∑
k∈Ωb
t+s
mkb
kt+s ·qkt+s(mkv
kt+s +mkb
kt+s + f
mckt+s),
where eqkt represents sales when product j is withdrawn from the market in time t.7 We consider
one-period deviations similar to Lee and Fong (2013) and other empirical dynamic papers. In the
second term, f
mct+s refers to future marginal costs when the quantity in period t is eqt instead of qt.
We impose three simplifying assumptions:
(A1) Battery suppliers believe that the current market structure, consumer preferences, and market
size continue indefinitely:
Ωv
t+s = Ωv
t and Ωb
t+s = Ωb
t for all s = 1,2,...
(A2) Battery suppliers do not consider the impact of the battery price on future markups:
∂mkv
kt+s
∂τjt
=
∂mkb
kt+s
∂τjt
= 0 for all j,k, and s.
(A3) Battery suppliers assume future markups to remain the same as the equilibrium markups
(mk∗) in the current period:
mkv
jt+s = mkv∗
jt and mkb
jt+s = mkb∗
jt for all j and s.
Adjusting the battery price in the current period affects not only current profits but also the ex-
perience gained by battery suppliers, which influences future production costs. The future profits
depend on future markups and quantities, and thus, the choice of the current battery price impacts
future profits in two ways: (1) by changing future markups and (2) by influencing future sales vol-
umes. Assumption (A2) indicates that battery suppliers do not account for the first channel (the
impact on future markups) when negotiating battery prices with automakers. Instead, they focus
solely on the second channel (how the current battery prices affect future sales quantities via LBD
cost reductions). Lastly, Assumption (A3) suggests that battery suppliers believe future markups
remain at the current equilibrium level. Assumption (A2) is a behavioral assumption that makes
the dynamic analysis tractable, in spirit similar to Gowrisankaran and Rysman (2012) and Benkard,
Jeziorski, and Weintraub (2015).8
6The battery price for EV model k is equal to its production cost plus the battery supplier’s markup τk = mcb
k +mkb
k.
7Markups and costs of other EVs remain unchanged by construction.
8Gowrisankaran and Rysman (2012) develop a dynamic demand model and assume for tractability that the evolution
A-9


===== [PAGE 59] =====

With these assumptions, the bargaining FOC with respect to battery prices is as follows:
(1−λ b)(V b
t −Db
t )∂πv
t
∂τjt
+λ b(πv
t −dv
t )∂V b
t
∂τjt
= 0.
The derivative of battery suppliers’ payoff under agreement with respect to battery price becomes:
∂V b
t
∂τjt
= qjt + ∑
k∈Ωbt
mkb
kt · ∂qkt
∂pjt
|
{z
}
Impact on current profit
+
∞
∑
s=1
β s ∑
k∈Ωbt
mkb∗
kt ·∑
m
∂qkt+s
∂pmt+s
dmcmt+s
dτ jt
.
|
{z
}
Impact on future profits via LBD
In matrix notation, the bargaining FOC can be rewritten as:
(1−λ b)
h
(Tb
t ⊗S+
t )·mkb
t
i
⊗[(Tv
t ⊗∆t)·mkv
t ]+λ b [(Tv
t ⊗St)·mkv
t ]⊗
h
qt +(Tb
t ⊗∆+
t )·mkb
t
i
= 0,
where ⊗is the element-wise multiplication. Note that T and S are the same as those defined in
Equation 5. The matrix ∆t represents the derivative of EV demand in period t with respect to EV
prices. In contrast, S+ is a deviation matrix that incorporates dynamic terms, with (j,k)-element:
S+
jk = (qkt −eqkt)+
∞
∑
s=1
β s ·(qjt+s −eqjt+s).
(A6)
In comparison, S only includes the first term in Equation (A6). Similarly, the ∆+
t also incorpo-
rates the derivatives of future EV demand due to changes in future marginal costs through LBD.
Specifically, the (j,k)-element of ∆+
t is:
∆+
jkt = ∂qkt
∂pjt
+
∞
∑
s=1
β s∑
m
∂qkt+s
∂pmt+s
dmcmt+s
dτ jt
.
(A7)
Note that ∆t only includes the first term in Equation (A7).
Finally, we derive the upstream markup as a function of the downstream markup from the FOCs,
similar to the approach in Section 3.2:
mkb
t = −
(1−λ b)
λ b
·Xt ·(Tb
t ⊗S+
t )+(Tb
t ⊗∆+
t )
−1
·qt,
(A8)
of the value of purchase follows a simple one-dimensional Markov process. Benkard, Jeziorski, and Weintraub (2015)
develop the notion of a partially oblivious equilibrium, where firms only keep track of the states of dominant firms and
the long-run industry state instead of keeping track of the state of every single firm in the industry. This simplifying
assumption allows the dynamic oligopoly model to remain relatively tractable to compute and estimate.
A-10


===== [PAGE 60] =====

where Xt is a diagonal matrix:
Xt := diag

[(Tv
t ⊗∆t)·mkv
t ]⊘[(Tv
t ⊗St)·mkv
t ]

.
The notation ⊘denotes element-wise division. Given Equation (A8), the estimation process fol-
lows the steps as outlined in Section 4.2.
C
Counterfactual Analyses and Simulations
C.1
Supply Network Formation Model
We conduct counterfactual simulations to examine two types of policies: (1) consumer subsidies
and (2) domestic content requirements. As the domestic content requirement policy likely affects
the supply network and shifts battery sales from foreign to domestic suppliers, we need to de-
velop a network formation model that predicts supply links with and without the domestic content
requirement.
The unit of analysis for the network formation model is an EV model-battery supplier-country-
year combination, with a total of 23,495 observations. The model includes a rich set of controls
for the lagged network structure, a dummy for China’s whitelist policy, the subsidy rate offered by
country c at time t for a given EV model, the experience of the battery supplier, a home bias dummy,
dummies for supplier-automaker pairs that are vertically integrated, and initial attributes of battery
suppliers. Table A8 reports estimation results for the network formation model. The generosity of
subsidies provided is a key variable of interest that generates exogenous variation in the predicted
network formation. It equals the subsidy per EV sold, provided the supply relationship meets the
eligibility requirement for EV consumer subsidies (i.e., the domestic content requirement). During
China’s whitelist policy in 2016-2019, Chinese EV models that sourced batteries from suppliers
not on the list (e.g., non-Chinese battery suppliers) were ineligible for subsidies. The coefficient
estimate is large in magnitude and statistically significant. The other variables have the expected
signs. For example, battery suppliers with more accumulated experience are more likely to be
selected and EV makers are more likely to select battery suppliers with whom they have previous
relationships.
C.2
Algorithm for Counterfactual Analyses
For each counterfactual, we conduct 100 simulations and report the average outcomes. Each sim-
ulation process involves the following steps. In the initial year of 2013, given EV and battery pro-
duction costs, battery prices are determined by the upstream bargaining FOCs in Equation (4) and
EV prices are set based on the downstream price competition FOCs in Equation (3). Equilibrium
A-11


===== [PAGE 61] =====

EV sales are calculated based on these prices. We update the cumulative production experience of
battery producers using these equilibrium EV sales, which results in lower battery production costs
in 2014 (LBD). If new EV models enter the market in 2014, we draw a battery supplier based on
the link formation model and the predicted probabilities of supplier selection. Using the updated
production costs and battery supply network, equilibrium prices and sales are recalculated. This
process is repeated annually through 2020.
Because the link formation process is stochastic, we conduct 100 simulations. The welfare
tables and figures are based on the average outcome across these 100 simulations.
For the whitelist policy counterfactual analyses, all EV models are allowed to choose a battery
supplier in 2016, Table 7 examines the welfare implications of postponing the whitelist to 2021-
2025, which is after the final sample year. To simulate firm profits and consumer surplus from
2021 to 2025, we assume that the market structure and global subsidies during this period remain
the same as in the final sample year 2020. As battery suppliers accumulate production experience,
the learning-induced reduction in production costs persists throughout the forward simulation. All
EV models choose a battery supplier in the first year of the counterfactual Whitelist policy (2021).
The subsequent steps of the simulation follow the procedures described above.
C.3
Environmental Benefits of EV Adoption
This section describes the environmental benefits of EVs relative to gasoline vehicles. Replacing
a gasoline vehicle with an electric vehicle (EV) could deliver environmental benefits through re-
ductions in both CO2 emissions and local air pollution. These benefits are monetized as carbon
benefits (via the social cost of carbon) and health benefits (via reduced pollutant exposure). We
explain how these two items are calculated below.
Carbon Reduction Benefit
The carbon reduction benefit reflects the avoided economic damages
from reduced CO2 emissions. A typical gasoline vehicle in the U.S. emits 4.6 tons of CO2 annually,
assuming an average annual vehicle miles traveled (VMT) of 11,500 miles (FHWA, 2022). The
average annual VMTs for China, Europe, and South Korea / Japan are 10,000 miles/year (CMT,
2022), 9,500 miles/year (Eurostat, 2020), and 10,200 miles/year (KTI, 2023), respectively. Carbon
emission reductions when a gasoline vehicle is replaced with an EV depends on the carbon intensity
of electricity grids (International Energy Agency, 2023). The emission reduction factor is estimated
to be 50% for China (due to its coal-heavy grid), 70% for the U.S. (due to its relatively clean grid
with renewables and natural gas), 60% for Europe (due to its moderately clean grid with significant
renewables), and 52.5% for South Korea and Japan (due to their mixed reliance on fossil fuels
and nuclear energy). Finally, the latest estimate of the social cost of carbon is $185 per ton of
A-12


===== [PAGE 62] =====

CO2, based on comprehensive global evidence (Rennert,Kevin and Others, 2022). The lifetime
CO2 savings for each region is calculated as: 4.6 tons of CO2 per year ×Region VMT
US VMT
× Emission
Reduction Factor × Vehicle lifetime of 12 years.
Health Benefit
The health benefit is derived from reductions in local air pollutants such as PM2.5,
NOx, and VOCs. These pollutants are shown to cause respiratory and cardiovascular diseases,
premature deaths, and other health issues. The health costs of different pollutants are: $100,000
to $200,000 per ton of PM2.5 (HEI, 2022), $10,000 to $40,000 per ton of NOx (EPA, 2021), and
$5,000 to $15,000 per ton of VOCs (Holland et al., 2016). The total health benefit is calculated
similarly to carbon reduction benefit.
Environmental Benefits
The lifetime environmental benefits of replacing a gasoline vehicle with
an EV are summarized in Table A2. The benefit ranges from $16,465 (South Korea & Japan) to
$19,506 (China) as shown in Column (4). Regional variations reflect differences in annual vehicle
miles traveled and grid carbon intensity.
The calculations above are based on the environmental performance of an average gasoline
vehicle in the fleet, implicitly assuming that EVs replace an average gasoline vehicle. Xing, Leard,
and Li (2021) document that the EVs tend to replace more fuel efficient gasoline vehicles and
hybrid vehicles. Therefore, ignoring the non-random replacement of gasoline vehicles would result
in overestimating emissions benefits of EVs by 39 percent. To be on the conservative side, we
scale down the environmental benefits by half (shown in Column (5) and use these estimates in our
welfare analysis.
Table A2: Lifetime Environmental Benefits Of Replacing A Gasoline Vehicle With An EV
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Region
CO2 Savings
Carbon Benefit
Health Benefit
Total Benefit ($)
(ton/year)
($)
($)
Upper
Lower
China
2.3
5,106
14,400
19,506
9,753
United States
3.22
7,141
12,000
19,141
9,571
Europe
2.76
6,124
10,800
16,924
9,462
South Korea & Japan
2.42
5,365
11,100
16,465
8,233
Notes: The calculation of environmental benefits assumes 12 years of vehicle lifetime. The lower bound
recognizes the fact EVs tend to replace more fuel efficient vehicles than an average gasoline vehicle.
A-13


===== [PAGE 63] =====

D
Appendix Figures
Figure A1: Global EV Diffusion
(a) EV Sales by Region
0
5
10
15
20
Global EV Share (%)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
EV Sales (in mil)
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Europe
US
China
Global EV Share
(b) ZEV Targets and Market Shares
Norway
Netherlands
UK
France
Germany
US
China
Japan
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Share of ZEVs in new sales
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
Historical
Targeted
Notes: In Panel (a), the bars (left y-axis) report the annual sales of new EVs (BEVs and PHEVs) by region from 2012
to 2023. China, Europe, and the U.S. accounted for over 95% of global EV sales during this period. The grey line
(right y-axis) depicts the global share of EVs in new vehicle sales. Panel (b) depicts the zero-emission vehicle (ZEV)
targets and market shares over time by country. ZEVs include EVs and fuel cell vehicles but are predominantly EVs.
Source: International Energy Agency and the International Council on Clean Transportation.
A-14


===== [PAGE 64] =====

Figure A2: Battery Supplier Network
(a) 2013 Network
(b) 2020 Network
Notes: The graphs depict the vertical relationship between battery suppliers (on the left) and EV producers (on the right)
in 2013 (Panel (a)) and 2020 (Panel (b)). The top 6 battery suppliers and top 8 EV producers are shown separately,
illustrating an oligopoly market structure in both the upstream and downstream sectors. The thickness of the lines
represents the battery sales volume in units.
Figure A3: EV Subsidies
(a) Average Subsidy by Country
(b) Subsidy Design in China
Notes: Panel (a) shows the average federal subsidy per eligible EV by country during 2013-2020. Panel (b) shows the
subsidy schedule for BEVs in China, where the subsidy amount is based on driving range (Barwick, Kwon, and Li,
2024).
A-15


===== [PAGE 65] =====

Figure A4: Instruments for Firm Experiences and Battery Markups
(a) Battery Supplier Experience
(b) Battery Markup
(c) EV Producer Experience
Notes: Binned scatter plots illustrate the strength of the IVs for the experience and markups of battery suppliers (Panels
(a) and (b)), as well as the IV for the experience of EV producers (Panel (c)). Residuals are obtained from partialling
out vehicle attributes, as well as country, brand, and year fixed effects.
A-16


===== [PAGE 66] =====

Figure A5: Impact of China’s Whitelist Policy (Early and Late) on Battery Production
(a) Early Whitelist, Chinese Battery
(b) Early Whitelist, JP & KR Battery
(c) Late Whitelist, Chinese Battery
(d) Late Whitelist, JP & KR Battery
Notes: Panel (a) illustrates EV battery production by Chinese suppliers under scenarios with and without China’s
observed whitelist policy in 2016-2019. Panel (b) presents battery production by non-Chinese suppliers under the
same scenarios. Panels (c) and (d) repeat the exercise and depict the impact on forward-simulated battery production
if the whitelist policy was implemented between 2021 and 2024 instead.
A-17


===== [PAGE 67] =====

E
Appendix Tables
Table A3: Cost Estimates with Simultaneous Contracting and Pricing: Robustness to λ
Bargaining Parameter
Estimated
λ b = 0
λ b = 0.25
λ b = 0.5
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Battery Cost Parameters
Learning Parameter γE
-0.140
-0.124
-0.135
-0.157
(0.051)
(0.049)
(0.051)
(0.054)
γ0(1000$/kWh)
0.958
0.982
0.964
0.933
(0.172)
(0.176)
(0.173)
(0.167)
BK*Time Trend
-0.028
-0.031
-0.029
-0.026
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.006)
BK*log(Plant Capacity)
-0.080
-0.086
-0.081
-0.072
(0.035)
(0.037)
(0.035)
(0.033)
BK * Battery Chemistry Dummies
✓
✓
✓
✓
BK * Lithium Prices
✓
✓
✓
✓
Vehicle Cost Parameters
EV Experience
-1.104
-1.130
-1.111
-1.059
(0.43)
(0.442)
(0.433)
(0.417)
PHEV
2.236
3.055
2.449
1.282
(1.094)
(1.131)
(1.104)
(1.055)
Horsepower
0.239
0.249
0.241
0.227
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
Volume
0.729
0.845
0.760
0.585
(0.229)
(0.239)
(0.232)
(0.219)
Bargaining Parameter
Bargaining Weight, λ b
0.311
0.00
0.25
0.50
(0.104)
Fixed Effects
Country
✓
✓
✓
✓
EV Maker
✓
✓
✓
✓
Battery Supplier
✓
✓
✓
✓
Year
✓
✓
✓
✓
Notes: This table reports parameter estimates for Equation (8). The dependent variable (EV price minus EV markups)
is in $1,000. Column (1) is identical to Column (4) in Table 3. Columns (2)-(4) fix the bargaining parameter λ and es-
timate the remaining parameters by GMM with battery supplier experience and EV producer experience instrumented.
See Table 3 for variable definitions.
A-18


===== [PAGE 68] =====

Table A4: Cost Estimates With Sequential Contracting and Pricing
Bargaining Parameter
λ b = 0
λ b = 0.25
λ b = 0.5
λ b = 0.75
λ b = 1
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Battery Cost Parameters
Learning Parameter γE
-0.124
-0.130
-0.136
-0.142
-0.148
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.051)
(0.052)
(0.052)
γ0(1000$/kWh)
0.977
0.963
0.949
0.934
0.918
(0.179)
(0.177)
(0.174)
(0.17)
(0.167)
BK*Time Trend
-0.031
-0.030
-0.029
-0.027
-0.026
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
BK*log(Plant Capacity)
-0.085
-0.082
-0.079
-0.075
-0.072
(0.037)
(0.036)
(0.035)
(0.034)
(0.033)
BK * Battery Chemistry Dummies
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
BK * Lithium Prices
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Vehicle Cost Parameters
EV Experience
-1.097
-1.099
-1.098
-1.093
-1.086
(0.443)
(0.437)
(0.43)
(0.422)
(0.415)
PHEV
3.013
2.549
2.093
1.651
1.229
(1.132)
(1.11)
(1.087)
(1.064)
(1.04)
Horsepower
0.249
0.243
0.237
0.231
0.225
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
Volume
0.857
0.779
0.694
0.606
0.515
(0.239)
(0.234)
(0.229)
(0.224)
(0.218)
Fixed Effects
Country
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
EV Maker
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Battery Supplier
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Year
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Notes: This table reports supply-side parameter estimates under sequential contracting and pricing (Appendix B.2),
with different values of the bargaining parameter λ b. Estimation is done analogously to that in Table 3. See Table 3
for variable definitions.
A-19


===== [PAGE 69] =====

Table A5: Cost Estimates with Forward-Looking Battery Suppliers
Bargaining Parameter
λ b = 0
λ b = 0.25
λ b = 0.5
λ b = 0.75
λ b = 1
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Battery Cost Parameters
Learning Parameter γE
-0.123
-0.129
-0.135
-0.140
-0.141
(0.05)
(0.053)
(0.056)
(0.059)
(0.078)
γ0(1000$/kWh)
0.977
0.957
0.935
0.910
0.864
(0.177)
(0.18)
(0.182)
(0.184)
(0.206)
BK*Time Trend
-0.031
-0.029
-0.028
-0.027
-0.026
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
BK*log(Plant Capacity)
-0.085
-0.083
-0.081
-0.080
-0.079
(0.037)
(0.036)
(0.035)
(0.034)
(0.058)
BK * Battery Chemistry Dummies
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
BK * Lithium Prices
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Vehicle Cost Parameters
EV Experience
-1.091
-1.099
-1.111
-1.125
-1.149
(0.442)
(0.436)
(0.429)
(0.423)
(0.428)
PHEV
3.013
2.512
2.021
1.537
0.947
(1.13)
(1.109)
(1.088)
(1.068)
(1.036)
Horsepower
0.249
0.243
0.238
0.232
0.226
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
Volume
0.864
0.790
0.716
0.641
0.603
(0.239)
(0.233)
(0.228)
(0.223)
(0.214)
Fixed Effects
Country
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
EV Maker
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Battery Supplier
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Year
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Notes: This table reports supply-side parameter estimates when battery firms are forward-looking with a discount
factor of 0.95 (Appendix B.4), with different values of the bargaining parameter λ b. Estimation is done analogously to
that in Table 3. See Table 3 for variable definitions.
A-20


===== [PAGE 70] =====

Table A6: Cost Estimates: Additional Robustness Checks
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
EV Brand
BK*Country
Alternative
Higher-order
FEs
FEs
learning IV
EV characteristics
Battery Cost Parameters
Learning Parameter γE
-0.177
-0.119
-0.147
-0.123
(0.109)
(0.048)
(0.052)
(0.049)
γ0(1000$/kWh)
1.044
0.968
1.005
0.903
(0.358)
(0.16)
(0.18)
(0.168)
BK*Time Trend
-0.020
-0.016
-0.028
-0.037
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
BK*log(Plant Capacity)
-0.057
-0.110
-0.079
-0.016
(0.479)
(0.032)
(0.035)
(0.032)
BK * Battery Chemistry Dummies
✓
✓
✓
✓
BK * Lithium Prices
✓
✓
✓
✓
BK * Country FE
✓
Vehicle Cost Parameters
EV Experience
-0.833
-1.380
-1.155
-0.547
(0.883)
(0.418)
(0.428)
(0.398)
PHEV
7.847
0.787
2.395
7.661
(1.774)
(1.224)
(1.098)
(1.17)
Horsepower
0.217
0.245
0.239
0.298
(0.01)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.033)
Volume
0.677
0.445
0.715
-11.014
(0.313)
(0.223)
(0.23)
(1.004)
Bargaining Parameter
Bargaining Weight, λ b
0.396
0.365
0.311
0.267
(0.118)
(0.089)
(0.105)
(0.112)
Fixed Effects
Country
✓
✓
✓
✓
EV Maker
✓
✓
✓
✓
Battery Supplier
✓
✓
✓
✓
Year
✓
✓
✓
✓
Brand FE
✓
2nd order EV attributes
✓
Notes: This table reports supply-side parameter estimates under various robustness checks. The baseline estimates are
in Column (4) of Table 3. Relative to the baseline, Column (1) of this table adds EV brand fixed effects (on top of the
existing EV firm, battery supplier, country and year fixed effects). Column (2) includes BK* country fixed effects to
account for potential differences in unobserved costs or human capital across countries. In Column (3), we exclude
China’s Whitelist policy in constructing the experience IV (as defined in equation (9)). In Column (4), we control for
second-order polynomial terms of the EV characteristics in Xjct: Volume2, HP2 andVolume×Horsepower. Estimation
of all specifications is done analogously to that in Table 3.
A-21


===== [PAGE 71] =====

Table A7: Welfare Effects of Increasing CATL’s / Panasonic’s Experience in 2013
Increasing CATL’s experience
Increasing Panasonic’s experience
China
Rest of World
Global
Japan
Rest of World
Global
∆CATL or Panasonic Profit
1.00
-
1.00
1.00
-
1.00
∆Other Battery Profit
-0.04
-0.01
-0.05
-0.03
-0.02
-0.05
∆EV Variable Profit
2.04
-0.01
2.03
0.00
2.00
2.00
∆Consumer Surplus
2.75
0.00
2.76
0.01
2.56
2.57
∆Gov’t Expenditure
1.77
0.00
1.77
0.00
2.48
2.48
∆Welfare
3.98
-0.02
3.97
0.98
2.06
3.04
Notes: This table reports welfare changes from an exogenous increase of 10,000 units in CATL’s or Panasonic’s
experience in 2013. Changes in CATL’s or Panasonic’s profits are normalized to one, and all other values are expressed
relative to these changes.
Table A8: Network Formation Model for Counterfactual Simulations
Dep. var.: Link Formed
Eligible Subsidy
0.471∗∗∗
(0.111)
log(Supplier Experience)
0.666∗∗∗
(0.159)
Supplier-automaker Lagged Link
2.884∗∗∗
(0.199)
Supplier-automaker Lagged Link, Same Country
0.501∗∗∗
(0.127)
Dummies for Vertically Integrated Firms
Yes
Initial Link, Home Bias
Yes
Fixed Effects for Top 6 Suppliers
Yes
Supplier Characteristics
Yes
Log-likelihood
-1,265.59
Observations
23,495
Notes: The unit of analysis is a model-country-year-battery supplier combination. The dependent variable is one if
the automaker for that EV model sources battery from a given battery supplier, and zero otherwise. The results are
from a conditional logit regression. Standard errors are clustered at the country - automaker level. Each automaker
chooses from the top 15 battery suppliers that had already entered the global market and accounted for 94.3% of the
market share. We also allow EV makers to choose a new battery supplier for each EV model in the year 2016 (even
for existing models), the beginning year of China’s whitelist policy. The eligible subsidy is the subsidy per EV sold,
provided the supply relationship meets the eligibility requirement for EV consumer subsidies. From 2016-2019, EVs in
China were ineligible for subsidies if their battery supplier was not on the whitelist. We control for the lagged network
structure using dummies: one dummy if the supplier-automaker pair had a previous supply relationship, and another
dummy if they had a previous supply relationship in the same country. We also include a home bias dummy if the
supplier-automaker pair has the same country of origin. We include dummies for all supplier-automaker pairs that are
vertically integrated. We also include the age of each supplier, and the following initial characteristics of a supplier:
the average battery capacity, the most common chemistry of batteries initially supplied, and the average number of
models supplied. Finally, fixed effects for the top 6 battery suppliers are included.
A-22


===== [PAGE 72] =====

Table A9: Impact of Consumer Subsidies Including Environmental Benefits
China
Europe
JP & KR
N. America
Global
Panel (a): Impact of US Subsidies
∆Welfare ($ bn.)
0.52
3.07
7.33
17.62
28.54
∆Consumer Surplus (+)
0.22
1.23
0.05
15.02
16.52
∆Battery Variable Profit (+)
-0.34
-
6.09
-
5.75
∆EV Variable Profit (+)
0.47
1.72
1.18
8.61
11.98
∆Gov’t Expenditure (−)
-0.03
0.52
0.01
14.05
14.55
∆Environ. Benefit (+)
0.14
0.64
0.02
8.04
8.84
∆EV Sales
14,847
67,294
2,822
839,574
924,537
Panel (b): Impact of European Subsidies
∆Welfare ($ bn.)
0.88
11.17
7.57
3.74
23.37
∆Consumer Surplus (+)
0.21
16.45
0.06
1.40
18.12
∆Battery Variable Profit (+)
-0.17
-
5.42
-
5.27
∆EV Variable Profit (+)
0.63
4.90
2.07
2.15
9.75
∆Gov’t Expenditure (−)
-0.06
18.44
0.01
0.59
18.97
∆Environ. Benefit (+)
0.15
8.24
0.03
0.78
9.20
∆EV Sales
15,209
871,074
3,449
81,778
971,511
Panel (c): Impact of Chinese Subsidies
∆Welfare ($ bn.)
82.40
2.33
-0.27
2.16
86.61
∆Consumer Surplus (+)
36.64
1.44
0.02
0.77
38.87
∆Battery Variable Profit (+)
12.10
-
-0.63
-
11.46
∆EV Variable Profit (+)
22.64
0.81
0.33
1.28
25.06
∆Gov’t Expenditure (−)
31.93
0.53
0.00
0.31
32.77
∆Environ. Benefit (+)
42.95
0.61
0.01
0.42
43.99
∆EV Sales
4,403,391
64,565
1,530
44,219
4,513,704
Notes: This table shows the aggregate impact (2013-2020) of consumer subsidies on social welfare, similar to Table
5, except that the social welfare includes environmental benefits (the second to the last row in each panel). The
environmental benefits of EV adoption are calculated based on the lower bound estimates of the environmental benefits
of replacing a gasoline vehicle with an EV in Column (5) of Table A2. Panel (a) estimates the effect of US subsidies
by comparing scenarios with and without these subsidies, holding consumer subsidies in China and Europe constant.
Panels (b) and (c) are constructed analogously.
A-23
