

===== [PAGE 1] =====

 
 
Vehicle Attribute Tradeoffs 
and the Distributional Effects 
of US Fuel Economy and 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Standards 
Benjamin Leard, Joshua Linn, and Katalin Springel 
 
 
Working Paper 23-04 
March 2023 


===== [PAGE 2] =====

Resources for the Future 
 
 i 
About the Authors 
Benjamin Leard is a university fellow at Resources for the Future (RFF) as well as an 
assistant professor and faculty fellow at University of Tennessee. He is an 
environmental economist who focuses his work on transportation policy, climate 
change, and discrete choice modeling. His recent work involves estimating household 
preferences for vehicle attributes and evaluating the costs and benefits of fuel 
economy and greenhouse gas standards for light duty vehicles. His work has been 
published in Science and he has been cited in the Washington Post for his research on 
consumer demand for autonomous vehicles. 
Joshua Linn is a professor in the Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics 
at the University of Maryland and a senior fellow at RFF. His research centers on the 
effects of environmental policies and economic incentives for new technologies in the 
transportation, electricity, and industrial sectors. His transportation research assesses 
passenger vehicle taxation and fuel economy standards in the United States and 
Europe. He has examined the effects of Beijing’s vehicle ownership restrictions on 
travel behavior, labor supply, and fertility. 
Katalin Springel is an assistant professor in the Department of Applied Economics at 
HEC Montréal. Her research focuses on industrial organization, energy and 
environmental economics, and public economics. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank seminar participants at American University, the Congressional Budget 
Office, the Environmental Protection Agency, HEC Montreal, ITAM, the Pacific 
Northwest National Laboratory, RFF, and the University of California at Davis and 
participants at the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists Summer 
Conference, International Industrial Organization Conference, International Workshop 
on Empirical Methods in Energy Economics, and Northeast Workshop on Energy 
Policy and Environmental Economics. We thank the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for 
funding this research. This paper supersedes two previously unpublished working 
papers, “Have US Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards Improved 
Social Welfare?” and “Pass-Through and Welfare Effects of Regulations that Affect 
Product Attributes.” 
 
 


===== [PAGE 3] =====

Vehicle Attribute Tradeoffs and the Distributional Effects of US Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards 
 ii 
About RFF 
Resources for the Future (RFF) is an independent, nonprofit research institution in 
Washington, DC. Its mission is to improve environmental, energy, and natural resource 
decisions through impartial economic research and policy engagement. RFF is 
committed to being the most widely trusted source of research insights and policy 
solutions leading to a healthy environment and a thriving economy.  
Working papers are research materials circulated by their authors for purposes of 
information and discussion. They have not necessarily undergone formal peer review. 
The views expressed here are those of the individual authors and may differ from 
those of other RFF experts, its officers, or its directors. 
Sharing Our Work 
Our work is available for sharing and adaptation under an Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) license. You can copy and 
redistribute our material in any medium or format; you must give appropriate credit, 
provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were made, and you may not 
apply additional restrictions. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any 
way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use. You may not use the 
material for commercial purposes. If you remix, transform, or build upon the material, 
you may not distribute the modified material. For more information, visit 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/. 
 
 


===== [PAGE 4] =====

Vehicle Attribute Tradeoffs and the Distributional Effects of US
Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards
Benjamin Leard* University of Tennessee and Resources for the Future
Joshua Linn
University of Maryland and Resources for the Future
Katalin Springel
HEC Montreal
March 2023
Abstract
This paper presents welfare and distributional effects of US passenger vehicle
fuel economy and greenhouse gas standards between 2012 and 2022.
We build an
equilibrium model that allows for endogenous markups, market shares, and nonprice
attributes.
The model includes fixed and variable costs of raising fuel economy,
manufacturer substitution between fuel economy and performance, and heterogeneous
consumer preferences and manufacturer costs. We estimate all demand and supply
parameters from observed consumer and manufacturer choices.
We find that the
standards have increased social welfare and that consumer undervaluation of fuel
cost savings accounts for most of the social benefits.
Manufacturers achieve most
fuel economy improvements by trading off horsepower rather than adjusting prices or
adding fuel-saving technology. Due to this compliance strategy, the standards have been
progressive because high-income households value horsepower much more than low-
income households do. Consumer undervaluation of fuel cost savings also contributes
to progressivity.
Keywords: fuel economy standards, attribute trade-offs, medium run
JEL codes: L11, L50, L62, Q41
*Leard (leard@rff.org) i s a n a ssistant p rofessor a t t he U niversity o f Tennessee a nd a  u niversity fellow 
at Resources for the Future (RFF). Linn (linn@rff.org) is a professor at the University of Maryland and a 
senior fellow at RFF. Springel (katalin.springel@hec.ca)is an assistant professor at HEC Montreal. We thank 
seminar participants at American University, the Congressional Budget Office, the Environmental Protection 
Agency, HEC Montreal, ITAM, the Pacific N orthwest N ational L aboratory, R FF, a nd t he U niversity of 
California at Davis and participants at the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists Summer 
Conference, International Industrial Organization Conference, International Workshop on Empirical Methods 
in Energy Economics, and Northeast Workshop on Energy Policy and Environmental Economics. We thank 
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for funding this research. This paper supersedes two previously unpublished 
working papers, “Have US Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards Improved Social 
Welfare?” and “Pass-Through and Welfare Effects of Regulations that Affect Product Attributes.”
1


===== [PAGE 5] =====

1
Introduction
Economists recognize that government policy, such as antitrust or environmental
regulations, can affect attributes of products selling in differentiated markets. For example,
mergers between competing airlines or health care providers, or setting energy efficiency
standards for home appliances, may affect product quality and offerings (Chen and Gayle
2019; Johnson and Rhodes 2021; Houde 2018). Studies on the welfare effects of such policies
typically employ equilibrium models that endogenize product prices and attributes. Attribute
changes could also have distributional consequences across consumer demographic groups,
but this literature has largely focused on aggregate welfare implications of attribute choices
rather than distributional effects across consumers. Most literature on the distributional
effects of policy considers policy-induced product price changes, holding attributes fixed
(Weyl and Fabinger (2013), Ganapati et al. (2018)).
We evaluate the welfare and distributional effects of price and nonprice attribute
changes caused by US passenger vehicle fuel economy and greenhouse gas (GHG) standards.
Passenger vehicles are the main source of GHG emissions from the transportation sector.
Most countries that aim to reduce transportation sector emissions rely primarily on passenger
vehicle fuel economy and GHG standards, and about half of all new passenger vehicles sold
globally are subject to such standards. The US standards have tightened since 2005, but they
have been highly controversial; the Obama, Trump, and Biden administrations successively
tightened, weakened, and then retightened them.
Across the three administrations, the
regulatory agencies – the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) and
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) – have justified their actions based on regulatory
costs and distribution of costs across income groups.
We evaluate whether US standards have increased welfare and been progressive or
regressive across income groups after accounting for their price and nonprice attribute
changes.
Klier and Linn (2012) and Whitefoot et al. (2017) find that by trading off
performance for fuel economy, manufacturers can reduce the welfare costs compared to a
counterfactual in which performance is exogenous. However, like the broader literature on
policy and differentiated product markets, these studies consider only the aggregate welfare
implications of attribute changes. Studies on the distributional effects of the standards, such
as Jacobsen (2013), Davis and Knittel (2016) and Levinson (2016), endogenize vehicle prices
or fuel economy but not other attributes, such as performance. We model fuel economy-
performance tradeoff compliance behavior between 2012 through 2022, when the standards
tightened by 33 percent. In doing so, our paper represents the first retrospective welfare
2


===== [PAGE 6] =====

analysis of any fuel economy or GHG standards and the first to consider the distributional
consequences of changes caused by manufacturers trading off nonprice attributes.1
We estimate the standards’ welfare effects with a model that incorporates advances
in modeling both the supply and the demand sides of the new-vehicles market. For the
supply component of the model, manufacturers choose fuel-saving technology, fuel economy,
horsepower, and prices to maximize profits.
One can conceive of a frontier in the fuel
economy–horsepower space. Adopting costly fuel-saving technology causes the frontier to
shift away from the origin; having chosen a technology level, the manufacturer can move
along the frontier as it trades off fuel economy for horsepower without affecting production
costs. It can comply with standards by adjusting prices to increase relative sales of vehicles
that exceed their fuel economy requirements, adopting fuel-saving technology, and trading
off horsepower.
The supply component includes three advances over the literature. First, we allow for
the possibility that the standards affect the rate of fuel-saving technology adoption as well
as fuel economy and horsepower changes. Prior papers employing equilibrium models of the
vehicle market include the assumption that standards do not affect the rate of adoption,
which contradicts reduced-form evidence in Klier and Linn (2016).
Second, we introduce a fixed and sunk cost of adding fuel-saving technology that arises
from redesigning and testing the vehicle.
Blonigen et al. (2017) estimate that typical
fixed costs of a redesign amount to around $1 billion, which includes adopting fuel-saving
technology and other redesign elements, such as restyling the exterior. Adopting emissions-
reducing technologies likely introduces one-time fixed costs, as discussed in National Research
Council (2015) and EPA and NHTSA rulemaking, such as EPA (2010). EPA and NHTSA
assume that a constant markup above marginal costs covers fixed costs, but the economics
literature has ignored the possibility that firms incur fixed costs when adopting technology.2
We introduce a redesign cost that increases with the amount of adoption but is fixed with
respect to sales; unlike EPA and NHTSA assumptions, markups are endogenous. Every five
years, manufacturers redesign their vehicles and choose fuel-saving technology.
1The literature has considered welfare effects of relatively small changes in standards’ stringency. Klier
and Linn (2016) estimate weight, horsepower, and fuel economy effects of US and European GHG standards
and report back-of-the-envelope estimates of welfare effects caused by the attribute changes; they do not
perform a distributional analysis. Ito and Sallee (2018) estimate the effects of Japan’s standards on weight
and estimate aggregate welfare effects of small hypothetical policy changes.
2More precisely, EPA and NHTSA distinguish between direct costs of an emissions-reducing or fuel-saving
technology, which include the increase in production costs, and indirect costs, which include all other costs,
such as both fixed and variable costs. We distinguish between variable and fixed costs rather than direct
and indirect costs.
3


===== [PAGE 7] =====

The third unique feature of the supply side is that we use manufacturer profit
maximization first-order conditions and observed attribute choices to estimate all supply
parameters, including marginal costs, fixed costs of technology adoption, the technological
trade-off between fuel economy and horsepower, and the shadow prices of the standards.
We estimate the fixed costs from observed efficiency improvements over time, and we jointly
estimate marginal costs of production and shadow price of the regulatory constraint from
observed price and attribute choices. In contrast, most studies, such as Klier and Linn (2012),
use National Academies of Sciences reports to estimate technology costs. We find that fixed
costs rise quickly with efficiency improvements. Implied shadow prices of increasing fuel
economy have the same order of magnitude as the shadow price implied by observed credit
prices (Leard and McConnell 2017).
A distinguishing feature of the demand side of the model is that we define vehicles at
a highly disaggregated level, with several times more unique vehicles than in other studies,
and we allow for extensive heterogeneity in consumer preferences. The choice set of vehicles
available for purchase is comparable to that in the agencies’ analysis. The disaggregation
allows us to estimate more realistic preference parameters and substitution elasticities than
models that include more aggregated choice sets. We define 20 demographic groups based
on income (5 groups), age (2 groups), and population density (2 groups). We estimate a
unique set of preferences using data that cover the study period.
The main data set is
built from survey responses of about 1.5 million new-vehicle buyers between 2010 and 2018,
supplemented with data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), IHS Automotive,
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and Wards Auto.
The household survey data include
demographics such as income, age, and urbanization, which we use to estimate heterogeneous
preferences for vehicle attributes. We observe wide variation in vehicle purchase patterns
across groups.
We find that consumers undervalue fuel economy; a typical consumer is willing to pay
about $0.22 for $1 of present value fuel cost savings over the life of a vehicle, which is
consistent with recent literature (e.g., Gillingham et al. (2019)). Low-income consumers are
more sensitive to vehicle prices and willing to pay substantially less for fuel economy and
horsepower improvements than high-income consumers.
These demand estimates indicate three reasons that tightening standards may be
progressive.
First, the lower price sensitivity of the highest-income group means that
manufacturers can pass through more of the compliance costs to vehicles purchased by high-
income households (such as luxury cars) than low-income households (such as compact cars).
Second, the larger undervaluation for the lowest-income group indicates that it benefits
4


===== [PAGE 8] =====

more than the highest-income group from fuel economy improvements caused by tighter
standards; in other words, the demand estimates imply that low-income consumers obtain
a larger internality benefit over the life of a vehicle that gets better fuel economy. Third,
low-income consumers care less about the lower performance when manufacturers trade off
for fuel economy.
On the other hand, Jacobsen (2013) points out that low-income consumers are more likely
to buy used vehicles. To the extent that tighter standards reduce demand for new vehicles, as
the two are substitutes for one another, used vehicle prices would increase. This would harm
low-income consumers more than others, pushing against the three sources of progressivity
in the preceding paragraph. Our model includes the used-vehicle channel, which we can
compare to the three other reasons.
To assess the overall welfare and distributional effects of the standards, we use the model
to perform a static analysis of the standards by comparing steady states that occur 10
years after they are announced.
Because manufacturers redesign their vehicles every 5
years, the 10-year period allows two redesigns for compliance. We compare two scenarios:
maintaining stringency at 2012 levels and tightening to 2022 levels. The scenarios include
common assumptions about fuel prices, aggregate new vehicle demand, and battery costs
using data from 2022.
Our welfare analysis allows for the possibility that consumers
undervalue the fuel costs of potential purchases.3 Although Busse et al. (2013) conclude
that consumer choices are consistent with rational behavior, Allcott and Wozny (2014) find
some evidence of undervaluation, and Leard et al. (2017) and Gillingham et al. (2019) find
substantial evidence. Thus, at a minimum, the recent literature leaves open the possibility
that consumers systematically undervalue fuel economy. The regulatory agencies implicitly
assume consumers undervalue fuel costs, but except for Allcott (2013), the literature
has reported welfare estimates based on the assumption, either implicit or explicit, that
consumers fully value fuel costs.4 Consistent with our finding that consumers undervalue
fuel economy, our counterfactual scenarios use estimated consumer preferences to predict
their choices and the present discounted value of fuel cost savings to compute welfare.
3If consumers systematically undervalue fuel costs, manufacturers would have insufficient incentive to
adopt fuel-saving technology. Fuel economy or GHG standards could increase private welfare and be more
cost effective than a carbon tax (Allcott and Greenstone 2012).
4NHTSA and EPA do not explicitly state their assumption that consumers undervalue fuel costs. They
implicitly assume undervaluation, given their assumption about baseline technology adoption, and that
technologies that have a certain payback are adopted by manufacturers in the absence of fuel economy and
GHG regulation. Other technologies are only adopted if it is cost-effective to do so because of regulation.
The assumed payback period implies a substantial degree of undervaluation (Bento et al. 2018).
5


===== [PAGE 9] =====

Compared to maintaining the 2012 levels, the 2022 standards increased social welfare by
$83 billion, or about $1,200 per vehicle-buying household; these numbers correspond to the
lifetime welfare accruing to manufacturers that produced and consumers that bought vehicles
in a single year. Although it is difficult to compare our estimate directly to ex ante estimates
by EPA and NHTSA, ours appears to be smaller. Nonetheless, like the agencies predicted,
we find that standards have improved social welfare substantially. Fuel cost savings, rather
than GHG emissions reductions, account for the majority of welfare gains, which is also
consistent with EPA analysis.
Manufacturers comply with tighter standards by adopting additional fuel-saving
technology and trading off horsepower, with the latter accounting for the majority of fuel
economy improvements.
Manufacturers incur $6 billion of fixed costs for the technology
adoption in the high-stringency scenario, which represents a substantial portion of overall
welfare changes.
We note that the extensive heterogeneity in the model yields accurate estimates
of manufacturers’ compliance behavior and the standards’ overall benefits and costs.
Consumers have heterogeneous preference parameters; manufacturers have heterogeneous
costs for technology adoption and trading off performance. That is, the cost to manufacturers
of trading off the attributes depends partly on consumer valuation of them. For example,
Fiat-Chrysler buyers typically have higher willingness to pay (WTP) for performance than
do Toyota buyers, making it more costly (in terms of forgone profits) for Fiat-Chrysler to
trade off performance. The simulations reveal substantial variation in compliance strategies
across manufacturers, which is consistent with observed outcomes.
Turning to the distributional effects of the standards, we find that tighter standards
increase welfare of all income groups.
The 2022 standards increased the welfare of the
lowest-income group by $1,700 per household. The welfare increase diminishes steadily with
income; that of the highest-income group is just one-third that of the lowest-income group.
Thus, the three factors contributing to progressivity (price sensitivity, undervaluation, and
performance WTP) outweigh the used-vehicle market effects.
To determine which of those factors explains the estimated progressivity, we simulate
counterfactual scenarios that include differing assumptions on the preference parameters.
Assuming no undervaluation among all consumer groups eliminates internality benefits from
tightening standards, reducing consumer welfare. If we simulate counterfactuals without
undervaluation, the 2022 standards reduce welfare by $15 billion rather than increase it,
which is consistent with our finding that fuel cost savings account for most of the estimated
6


===== [PAGE 10] =====

benefits using estimated parameter values.
The standards remain progressive when we
eliminate undervaluation, indicating that it does not explain the progressivity. Likewise,
we estimate standards to be progressive if we simulate counterfactuals assuming that all
consumers have the same price sensitivity.
In contrast, if we eliminate consumer heterogeneity in demand for performance, standards
are regressive. This implies that the consumer preferences for performance, which is indirectly
affected by the standards, explain the estimated progressivity.
We focus our modeling on the new-vehicles market to address deficiencies in existing
models used to evaluate fuel economy standards.
The literature has identified three
inefficiencies of standards compared with a carbon tax:
the rebound effect, vintage-
differentiated regulation, and the use of tested rather than on-road emissions to assess
compliance. Our welfare estimates account for the rebound effect and on-road emissions
using the same approach as the EPA and NHTSA in their welfare analysis, which facilitates
comparison between our results and theirs.
Like them, we do not include the effects of
vintage-differentiated regulation on scrappage of older vehicles. Moreover, we do not include
certain benefits of higher fuel economy, such as reduced refueling time, because of the
numerous additional assumptions that would be necessary.
The results in Jacobsen and
van Benthem (2015) and the agencies’ analysis suggest that including these margins would
likely strengthen our finding that the standards have increased social welfare.
Above, we noted that our estimated total welfare gains of the standards appear to be
somewhat smaller than the EPA and NHTSA ex ante predictions, although nonetheless we
find large positive gains. Our analysis differs from theirs in two important ways. First,
they estimate benefits for a single representative consumer, which precludes distributional
analysis.
In contrast, our demand model differentiates consumers according to their
demographics. Second, the agencies assume the standards do not affect horsepower, which
eliminates the channel through which the standards have been progressive across income
groups.
The papers most closely related to ours are Klier and Linn (2012), Whitefoot et al.
(2017), Jacobsen (2013), and Reynaert (2021).
Klier and Linn (2012) and Whitefoot
et al. (2017) allow trading off fuel economy for horsepower, but they do not include fixed
costs or technology adoption when standards do not tighten.
Moreover, their consumer
preferences are estimated using data from the mid-2000s, and we find evidence that consumer
preferences have changed substantially over time. Similar to our paper, Jacobsen (2013) uses
an equilibrium model to estimate welfare effects, but in contrast, he finds that standards
7


===== [PAGE 11] =====

are regressive.
However, performance is exogenous in Jacobsen (2013), which explains
our differing results. Finally, like our paper, Reynaert (2021) allows for endogenous fuel
economy and fixed costs of technology adoption but uses prepolicy data (for the European
GHG standards) and does not analyze distributional consequences of the standards. Using
observed gasoline prices and market conditions allows us to characterize the realized welfare
effects of the standards.
In short, ours is the first to conduct a retrospective analysis
of standards and to simultaneously endogenize performance and analyze distributional
consequences of the standards.
More broadly, our estimation of supply parameters can be adapted for analyzing other
markets in which producers design and test their products, choosing multiple attributes that
consumers value. For example, regulating home appliances’ energy efficiency could induce
research and development in energy efficiency and affect multiple product attributes (Houde
and Spurlock 2015).
2
Policy Context, Data, and Market Trends
This section provides a brief overview of US fuel economy and GHG standards, describes
the main data sources, and summarizes recent trends in the US new passenger vehicle market.
2.1
Policy Context
The 2008 Energy Independence and Security Act requires NHTSA to set fuel economy
standards through 2030. The 2009 Supreme Court ruling in Massachusetts v. EPA granted
EPA the authority to regulate passenger vehicles’ GHG emissions under the Clean Air Act. In
2009, the Obama administration set requirements for the first phase of new joint fuel economy
and GHG standards, requiring manufacturers to increase the fuel economy and reduce
tailpipe GHG emissions of passenger vehicles sold during 2012–2016. In 2011, EPA and
NHTSA set standards through 2025, which would have roughly doubled average new vehicle
fuel economy between 2005 and 2025.5
In 2020, the Trump administration substantially
weakened standards for 2021–2026, which it justified by arguing that lower-than-expected
gasoline prices reduced the benefits and higher-than-expected technology costs raised the
costs of tighter standards. In 2022, the Biden administration chose to exceed the original
Obama standards through 2026.
5The fuel economy increase refers to the fuel economy used to assess compliance, which is based on a
specified laboratory testing procedure that yields fuel economy ratings that are roughly 20–25 percent higher
than those on new vehicles’ window stickers. We use the window sticker values in the demand estimation.
8


===== [PAGE 12] =====

Each manufacturer faces a standard that depends on the sales-weighted fuel economy
requirements of the vehicles it produces for sale in the United States, which depends on
class (car or light truck) and footprint (roughly, the area defined by the four wheels). Cars
have higher fuel economy and lower GHG requirements, and a smaller footprint means a
higher fuel economy requirement. Consequently, manufacturers that produce more cars and
smaller vehicles face higher fuel economy standards. As noted, manufacturers can comply
by adopting fuel-saving technology, trading off horsepower, or adjusting prices to increase
the market shares of vehicles whose fuel economy exceeds their requirements.
Along with setting the new federal standards, the federal agencies perform a regulatory
impact analysis (RIA) that estimates benefits and costs of future standards. It includes
only fuel-saving technology adoption, treating horsepower and market share as exogenous.
In 2010, EPA predicted net benefits, defined as the difference between benefits and costs,
of $228 billion (2018$) for vehicles sold between 2012 and 2016 ($45 billion per year). In
2011, EPA estimated net benefits of the 2017–2025 standards of $519 billion ($58 billion per
year). Note that the 2016 standards are the baseline against which the welfare gains of the
2017–2025 standards were estimated. However, because assumptions differ between the 2010
and 2011 analyses, it is not appropriate to add the two estimates together to compute total
net benefits of 2012–2025 standards. Likewise, it is difficult to compare the Trump and Biden
administration estimates with the Obama estimates because technology and other economic
assumptions differ.
2.2
Data
The primary data source for our analysis is the InMoment (formerly MaritzCX) New
Vehicle Customer Survey. InMoment conducts a monthly survey of households that recently
purchased or leased a new vehicle, with a response rate of about 9 percent. Our data include
about 1.5 million transactions between 2010 and 2018, which represents about a 1 percent
sample of new-vehicle buyers.
The InMoment survey asks detailed questions about the vehicle and household
demographics. Respondents report sales or lease prices of their recently obtained vehicle,
which include sale taxes but exclude any credit received from trade-ins.6 These prices may
be substantially different from the manufacturer’s suggested retail price (MSRP) frequently
used in studies, because the transaction price reflects the outcome of price negotiations
between the survey respondent and salesperson or unobserved promotions offered by the
6For about 10 percent of the transactions, we do not observe prices. We impute prices for these missing
observations based on observed transaction prices of the most closely related vehicles in the data.
9


===== [PAGE 13] =====

dealer or manufacturer. The advantage of using transaction prices rather than MSRP in our
empirical analysis is that it reduces concerns about price measurement error. Demographic
information includes the respondent’s age and years of schooling, household income (defined
as total annual household income from all sources, including wage and investment, before
taxes), state of residence, and urbanization (defined by population density).
The InMoment survey data also include the vehicle identification number for each
observation.
This allows us to define vehicles at a highly disaggregated level and yields
about 1,000 unique vehicle choices for consumers each year. Specifically, a vehicle is defined
by a unique model year (MY), make, model, trim or series, drive type, fuel type, body style,
and number of cylinders.
Each MY is defined as October of the previous calendar year
to September of the current calendar year. For example, MY 2015 is defined as October
2014 to September 2015. This definition aligns closely with the typical vehicle production
cycles observed in practice—that is, vehicle characteristics remain the same during each MY
but may change across MYs. The level of vehicle aggregation better reflects the choice set
available to consumers when they make their purchase or lease decision, compared with the
approach common in the literature, which defines a vehicle at the model level. For example,
consumers may choose among versions of a model that have different body style (such as
coupe or sedan) or engine size (such as four-cylinder or six-cylinder); our data distinguish
these choices. Furthermore, EPA and NHTSA define a unique vehicle in a similar fashion,
which eases the comparison between our and their welfare analyses of the fuel economy
and GHG standards. This highly differentiated choice set improves the identification of the
preference parameters compared with work that relied on more aggregated choice sets. The
level of disaggregation also alleviates concerns regarding measurement error and the resulting
bias in the estimated preference parameters.
We complement the survey data with a variety of other data.
We use fuel economy
ratings (miles per gallon) from EPA.7 For each vehicle’s fuel economy, we use combined city
and highway fuel economy ratings. The fuel-saving technologies include engine technologies,
such as cylinder deactivation, turbochargers, gasoline direct injection, and valve timing and
lift, and transmission technologies, such as additional gears and continuously variable or
dual-clutch transmissions.
For each vehicle, we merge characteristics data from Wards
7We link the EPA data to the InMoment data by vehicle, except for body style, which is not reported in
the EPA data but is unlikely to substantially reduce the available variation in fuel economy. Based on the
Wards Automotive data, our definition of a unique vehicle (excluding differentiation by body type) preserves
99 percent of variation in the EPA estimated fuel economy rating across all new vehicles.
10


===== [PAGE 14] =====

Automotive, which include MSRP, horsepower, size-related measures (such as width, height,
and length), curb weight, and wheelbase.8
We supplement the main data set by adding new vehicle registration data obtained
from IHS Automotive and new- and used-vehicle sales from the CEX.9 The IHS data
include quarterly vehicle registrations for all US households, providing us with market-level
information on vehicle demand. We obtain a count of used-vehicle purchases by year and
demographic group from the CEX data to use in our consumer demand model, in which
we define the outside option as the decision to purchase a used vehicle. We use the IHS
Automotive and CEX data to correct for nonrandom sampling of the InMoment survey. In
particular, we construct weights for the observations in the InMoment data to match the
distribution of sales across vehicles in the IHS data and across demographic groups in the
CEX data.10
We define 20 demographic groups:
5 income groups (constructed to approximately
represent the income quintiles of the distribution of households in the CEX data), 2 age
groups (defined as the respondent being younger than the median age of 45 in the data or
45+), and an urbanization indicator (equaling 1 if the household is located in an area with a
population density above the median). Additionally, the demographic groups are defined to
roughly match the count of households in the CEX data for each group.
The detailed
demographic information obtained from the InMoment survey allows us to differentiate
purchases made across different demographic groups and estimate heterogeneous preferences
for each vehicle attribute. Our choice of demographic groups is motivated by the fact that,
as the next subsection shows, observed purchase patterns vary substantially within income
groups and across age groups and urbanization rather than just across income groups.
Finally, fuel prices come from the US Energy Information Administration. We deflate all
transaction and fuel prices using the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index and
adjust them to 2018 US dollars.
2.3
Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents summary statistics. The average transaction price is $35,411, which is
consistent with market reports.11 The pooled sample column shows average fuel economy is
8For a small number of vehicle transactions with missing observations, we impute car attributes using
data from Cars.com.
9We merge the IHS data to the InMoment survey data by vehicle and the CEX data by MY, make, and
vehicle class, which is an indicator equaling 1 if the vehicle is a light truck.
10See Appendix for more details on the weighting procedure.
11See, for example, https://www.coxautoinc.com/market-insights/kbb-atp-may-2022/.
11


===== [PAGE 15] =====

25.5 miles per gallon, and cost per mile (defined as the relevant fuel price multiplied by the
rate of fuel consumption per mile) is about 13 cents per mile. Car and SUV sales shares are
46 and 39 percent; pickup trucks and vans represent the remainder.12
Although we have 20 demographic groups, because our policy analysis focuses on
distributional effects of the standards across income groups, the remaining columns report
average characteristics of vehicles bought by the 5 income groups. As expected, the average
transaction price increases with income. Low-income households tend to purchase vehicles
with higher fuel economy, which is consistent with the negative correlation between price
and fuel economy.
Throughout the paper, we use the log of the ratio of horsepower to
weight as a measure of performance, because this variable is directly proportional to the
time needed to accelerate a vehicle from rest to 60 miles per hour; it is also used commonly
in the literature (Greene et al. 2018). High-income households tend to buy vehicles that have
better performance, are larger, and have all-wheel drive and more hybrid, plug-in hybrid,
and electric vehicles.
2.4
Market Trends and Stringency of the Standards
We plot trends in the new-vehicle market during our sample period (2010–2018). Panel
A of Figure 1 plots sales-weighted average fuel economy of all US new cars and light trucks
sold; it increases gradually, by about 6 and 4 miles per gallon (about 19–24 percent relative
to 2010 levels). In Panel B of Figure 1, we plot the sales-weighted performance for cars and
light trucks. Performance of light trucks increased rapidly at the beginning and then more
slowly, whereas car performance was flat in the beginning before increasing. These patterns
reflect changes in product offerings as well as variation in consumer choices across available
options.
Panel C reports vehicle sales-weighted purchase prices (2018$) separately for cars and
light trucks. Real purchase prices declined gradually for both categories, with the average
being about $28,000 and $36,000.
Figure A.1 shows the changes in stringency between 2012 and 2022. For every vehicle
in the 2012 sample, we plot its footprint, fuel economy, and calculated requirement for 2012
and 2022. The two panels show the scatter plot for cars and light trucks. In both panels,
many 2012 vehicles exceed their 2012 requirements (in orange). But the 2022 standard is
sufficiently stringent that most 2012 vehicles have fuel economy well below their requirements.
Most of the vehicles exceeding their 2012 requirement have small footprints.
12These shares changed during our sample period, with SUVs gaining market share.
12


===== [PAGE 16] =====

3
The Equilibrium Model
We model the equilibrium of the US market for new light-duty vehicles. This section
presents the demand and supply sides of the market separately.
3.1
Demand
We define each market as an MY, indicated by t. Households maximize utility by choosing
among a composite used vehicle and a set of new vehicles. Household i experiences utility
uijt by choosing vehicle j in MY t, where j = 1, 2, ..., Jt indexes new vehicles available
in MY t, and j = 0 is a composite used vehicle. We index vehicle attributes by k and
household characteristics by d. We assign households to demographic groups indexed by g,
and we define the 20 demographic groups that were discussed in Section 2. The base group
is defined as being the lowest-income group, young, and urban. The indirect utility uijt of
household i from choosing vehicle j in market t is
uijt = vijt + εijt = fgjkt + δjt + εijt.
(1)
The term fgjkt includes components of utility that are unique to each household group.
For example, fgjkt includes a taste parameter for price that differs across income groups. The
term εijt is household i’s unobserved utility for vehicle j that is unexplained by the observed
vehicle attributes.
Under the standard assumption that the error term εijt has a type 1 extreme value
distribution, the probability that household i chooses vehicle j in market t is
Prijt =
evijt
P
l evilt .
(2)
For each demographic group, we normalize the utility of purchasing the composite used
vehicle to 0.
Based on this assumption and Equation (2), in the Appendix, we derive
an equation linking observed market shares, product attributes and marginal utilities, and
unobserved product attributes:
ln(sgjt) −ln(sg0t) = fgjkt + δjt
(3)
where sgjt and sg0t are market shares for vehicle j and the outside option (defined as a used
vehicle purchase) for demographic group g in market t.
13


===== [PAGE 17] =====

We make several comments on the structure of the choice model that yields Equation
(3). Each of the 20 demographic groups has a unique fgjkt. The heterogeneity implies that
aggregate substitution patterns are more plausible than those implied by a logit demand
model without heterogeneity across groups.
For example, an increase in the price of all
BMW vehicles has a larger effect on the market share of vehicles purchased by high-
income than low-income consumers. That is, the model structure relaxes the assumption
of independence of irrelevant alternatives across demographic groups. Therefore, the cross-
group heterogeneity allows a price increase for one vehicle to affect market shares of other
vehicles disproportionately. For example, our model allows a price increase for all BMW
vehicles to have a larger effect on market shares for Audi than for Chevrolet vehicles.
Our model is similar in spirit to Berry et al. (1995), in that we model heterogeneous
preferences for vehicle attributes. An important difference between our model and a random-
coefficients logit model is that, aside from the error term in Equation (3), our demographic
groups explain all preference heterogeneity, with no within-group preference heterogeneity.
For that reason, we include an extensive set of vehicle attributes in fgjkt, as we explain in
the next section.
We use Equation (3) as opposed to the traditional random coefficients in Berry et al.
(1995) to characterize heterogeneity for two reasons.
First, the distributional analysis
requires linking household demographics with preferences for vehicle attributes. The demand
structure allows us to show how the estimated preference parameter values map directly to
welfare changes for each group. This relationship is less transparent in a random-coefficients
logit model.
The second reason is for computational purposes. Random-coefficients models in the
style of Berry et al. (1995) require simulating choice probabilities and using an inner loop
contraction mapping; they need significant time to estimate and are prone to convergence
issues, which can yield biased elasticity estimates (Knittel and Metaxoglou 2014). In contrast,
our approach estimates the heterogeneity parameters with a fixed effects regression that is
computationally fast and avoids convergence issues.13
13Many papers include demand models in which changes in choice sets across markets identify heterogeneity
parameters, making it difficult to determine whether the implied heterogeneity reflects preferences or
something else (Ackerberg and Rysman 2005). In contrast, our model identifies heterogeneity parameters
by variation across demographic groups in response to variation in vehicle attributes across vehicles and
markets.
14


===== [PAGE 18] =====

3.2
Supply
Before describing the supply side of the model, we discuss briefly the three main supply-
side simplifications in the literature that we relax. First, most literature has ignored the
possibility that standards can affect attributes besides fuel economy. Goldberg (1998) and
Jacobsen (2013), among others, hold fixed other attributes, such as horsepower. However, as
in Knittel (2011), one can conceive of a frontier defined by a level of fuel-saving technology.
For a given engine size, a manufacturer can retune the engine or make small technology
changes to reduce horsepower, moving along the frontier. Klier and Linn (2016) show that
standards have affected performance (using horsepower as a proxy for performance), and Ito
and Sallee (2018) suggest that standards could affect an even broader range of attributes.
To our knowledge, only Klier and Linn (2012) and Whitefoot et al. (2017) allow performance
to be endogenous in their models.
Second,
the
literature
has
not properly accounted for technology adoption in
counterfactuals in which standards do not tighten over time. Knittel (2011) and Klier and
Linn (2016) show that historically, during periods when standards were not tightening, such
as the 1990s and early 2000s, manufacturers adopted fuel-saving technologies and used the
efficiency improvements to increase vehicle size and performance (i.e., horsepower or torque)
yet maintained a constant level of fuel economy. In contrast, during periods when standards
tighten, manufacturers adopt more technology and also shift along the frontier, trading off
performance. This situation implies that tightening standards could increase fuel economy
but decrease performance, relative to the equilibrium if standards remain fixed, and increase
the rate of technology adoption.
Studies that endogenize performance have assumed an
exogenous rate of technology adoption.
Third, except for Reynaert (2021), the literature does not include the fixed costs of
technology adoption. Vehicle manufacturers redesign each vehicle every 5–7 years, and as
discussed, the economics literature has largely ignored the possibility of fixed costs when
adopting technology.
As we explain next, the supply side avoids all three simplifications. Following Klier and
Linn (2012), we model the supply side in two periods. A set of vehicles in the market have
initial values of the same attributes included in the demand model.
Each manufacturer
maximizes profits.
In the first period, the manufacturer designs the vehicle and chooses a level of technology,
Td(j), where the subscript indicates that this is the same for each model, d.
It has the
opportunity to add technology for each of the models it sells.
15


===== [PAGE 19] =====

The second period represents the five years that follow the design period, reflecting the
typical cycle length. Given initial values of fuel economy and horsepower, the manufacturer
chooses fuel economy, horsepower, and price. The level of technology corresponds directly
to energy efficiency: a higher level allows the manufacturer to increase fuel economy without
sacrificing horsepower. Technology is scaled such that increasing Td(j) by 0.01 units allows
the manufacturer to increase fuel economy by 1 percent. Having chosen a level of technology,
the manufacturer can trade off fuel economy for performance. Thus, the representation of
technology corresponds to a production possibilities frontier in horsepower–fuel economy
space. Increasing the level of Td(j) causes the frontier to shift away from the origin, and after
choosing Td(j), the manufacturer can move along the frontier as it trades off horsepower for
fuel economy.
Thus, increasing technology from the endowed value allows the firm to provide higher
fuel economy or horsepower (or both). Higher technology causes marginal costs to increase
according to the function cj(Td(j)). Technology adoption also requires a fixed cost F(Td(j)),
incurred once for each model, to redesign and test the vehicle. Thus, when deciding whether
to adopt technology, the firm faces a trade-off between higher revenue, which the technology
enables, and the additional fixed and variable costs. The existence of the fixed costs implies
that manufacturers adopt more technology for higher-selling vehicles, all else equal. This is
consistent with the empirical evidence in Klier and Linn (2016).
We model the two periods as static. The profit maximization problem is
max
{pj,mj,hj,Tk(j)}j∈Jf
X
j∈Jf
[pj −cj(Td(j))]qj(pj,mj, hj) −F(Td(j))
(4)
subject to
X
j∈Jf
 1
mj
−1
Mj
!
qj = 0
(5)
and
ln(mj) = ln(m0j) + δh ln(hj) + δw ln(wj) + Td(j)
(6)
ln(cj) = ln(c0j) + γTd(j)
(7)
16


===== [PAGE 20] =====

where pj is the vehicle’s price, mj is the vehicle’s fuel economy, hj is its horsepower, qj is sales,
Mj is its fuel economy requirement, and wj is its weight. The initial levels of fuel economy
and marginal costs, prior to technology adoption, are m0j and c0j.Profits are the sum over
vehicles of quantity multiplied by the difference between price and marginal costs (cj(Td(j))),
less fixed costs (F(Td(j))). Equation (5) is the regulatory constraint, which requires that
the firm’s sales-weighted fuel consumption rate (the reciprocal of its fuel economy) equals
that of the standards. The requirement is indexed by j because it depends on the vehicle’s
class (car or truck) and footprint.14 The technology is chosen for each model, indexed by
d(j), during the design period. The fixed costs are incurred in the first period and must be
recovered during the subsequent five years. Therefore, the sales qj correspond to the sales
over a five-year period.
Equation (6) governs the trade-off between horsepower and fuel economy, given the
vehicle’s exogenous weight and endogenous technology. This equation has the same form as
that in Klier and Linn (2012), and is consistent with empirical analysis of the trade-off, such
as in Knittel (2011). The horsepower coefficient represents the tradeoff between horsepower
and fuel economy; a larger (in magnitude) coefficient indicates a larger fuel economy gain
from reducing horsepower.
The final equation links marginal costs to technology. Increasing technology by 0.01,
which enables a 1 percent fuel economy increase according to Equation (6), increases marginal
costs by γ percent.
We do not model credit trading across manufacturers.
During the first phase of the
standards, few credits were traded (Leard and McConnell 2017), and only a handful of
trades have been made.
Credit trading likely has had modest effects on manufacturers’
decisions and compliance costs. Nonetheless, omitting this flexibility mechanism from our
model means that we expect our compliance cost estimates to be higher than those actually
realized under the program.
3.3
Used Vehicle Market
The model includes a market for used vehicles.
Because new-vehicle fuel economy
standards affect new-vehicle attributes and new and used vehicles are substitutes, the
standards could affect demand for used vehicles (Jacobsen 2013; Bento et al. 2018; Linn
and Dou 2020; Leard 2022).
14Other papers, such as Jacobsen (2013), include regulatory constraints that are nonlinear in vehicle sales,
qj. Our linear constraint is a transformation of the constraint used in those papers.
17


===== [PAGE 21] =====

To account for this effect, we assume that used-vehicle supply is perfectly price inelastic
and that prices respond to used-vehicle demand changes caused by altering the standards.
Therefore, if tighter standards reduce demand for new vehicles and increase demand for used
vehicles, used-vehicle prices increase to restore equilibrium in that market. In practice, this
involves adjusting the utility of the outside option to compute counterfactual equilibria.
The assumption of perfectly inelastic supply is broadly consistent with Busse et al.
(2013), who report small effects of gasoline prices on equilibrium used-vehicle sales. Because
households are both buyers and sellers of used vehicles, that assumption likely has small
welfare implications, even though the used-vehicle market includes several times more sales
than does the new-vehicle market. Jacobsen (2013) finds that accounting for interactions
between the two markets has important implications for the distribution of welfare effects
across demographic groups, as high-income households are more likely to buy new vehicles.
For that reason, we are careful to interpret the estimated distributional effects of standards
across demographic groups as pertaining only to new-vehicle buyers; in our model, the
structure of the used-vehicle market has small effects on aggregate welfare estimates for
these consumers.
4
Estimation
Estimation consists of three stages.
For computational simplicity, we estimate the
demand model in two stages in the spirit of Goolsbee and Petrin (2004) and Train and
Winston (2007). First, we estimate mean utilities for each vehicle and differences in marginal
utilities between each demographic group and the base demographic group.
Second, we
estimate the utility parameters of the base group.15
Third, we estimate the supply-side
parameters. In this section, we describe the demand estimation strategy and results, followed
by supply.
4.1
Demand Estimation Strategy
4.1.1
First Stage: Heterogeneous Preference Parameters
In Equation (3), we define fgjkt = P
k
P
g xjkthgtβkg + νgjt. The term xjkt represents vehicle
j’s value of attribute k in market t; hgt is a dummy variable indicating demographic group
15In theory, we could estimate the demand model parameters in a single step. In practice, however, this
would be computationally challenging, given the large number of interactions we include. The first stage
is a simple fixed effects regression, which allows us to estimate many interaction terms. Estimating these
interactions in a single step by combining the first and second stages would require minimizing a GMM
objective function that does not have a closed-form solution.
18


===== [PAGE 22] =====

g; βkg is the difference between the marginal utility of vehicle attribute k for households
in demographic group g and that of the base group; νgjt represents group g’s unobserved
mean utility for vehicle j in market t; and xjkt includes seven characteristics: price, fuel
costs (in dollars per mile), performance (defined as the log of horsepower divided by weight),
footprint (the product of wheelbase and width), drive type, and dummies for the base and
high-end versions of a model.
We include the fuel economy, performance, and footprint
variables because they are directly related to fuel economy and emissions standards. The
other variables allow for preference heterogeneity over drive type and trim level (for example,
high-income consumers may have stronger preferences for high-end trims).
Inserting this definition in Equation (3) yields the first-stage estimating equation
ln(sgjt) −ln(sg0t) =
X
k
X
g
xjkthgtβkg + δjt + νgjt.
(8)
We estimate marginal utilities for the attributes in xjkt. We assign a single price for
each vehicle model variant. This assumption is consistent with zero search costs and large
passenger vehicle markets and implies no price discrimination across consumer groups for the
same vehicle model variant; the latter is consistent with analysis of the US market (Goldberg
1995).16
We add these interactions to address possible endogeneity concerns at the household
group level. In particular, observed attributes, such as fuel economy, could correlate with
unobserved attributes, which would bias our estimates of WTP for fuel economy. Controlling
for additional attributes, such as fuel type, drive type, and trim level, reduces this bias.
As is common in the vehicle demand literature, we compute per-mile fuel costs as the
price of gasoline in market t divided by fuel economy. This variable is proportional to the
present discounted value of the vehicle’s fuel costs if the current price of gasoline equals the
expected real price over the life of the vehicle. Based on the findings in Leard et al. (2017),
we assume that WTP for a fuel economy increase equals WTP for an equivalent gasoline
price decrease. Therefore, we use variation in fuel prices and fuel economy to identify the
fuel cost coefficient, and we use “WTP for fuel economy” synonymously with “WTP for a
fuel cost reduction.” We estimate each of the vehicle-market fixed effects as well as the 133
marginal utilities (19 demographic groups and seven characteristics).
16We estimate the model parameters using relatively recent data (2010–2018) during a time when websites
such as carmax.com and autotrader.com were commonly used and smartphones were mainstream. These
technologies have significantly lowered consumer search costs, which supports our single price assumption.
Using prices that vary by vehicle rather than by demographic group and vehicle reduces measurement error.
19


===== [PAGE 23] =====

Assuming
that
the
group-specific
utility
from
unobserved
vehicle
attributes
is
uncorrelated with utility from observed vehicle attributes allows us to estimate Equation (3)
with a fixed effects regression. Supporting this assumption is the extensive set of interactions
included in this equation, which allow for heterogeneous preferences for high-end trims. This
assumption is analogous to the assumption made in Berry et al. (1995) that consumer-specific
utilities for unobserved and observed product attributes are uncorrelated. This assumption
is implicit in Berry et al. (1995), but it is more apparent here because we adopt a two-
stage estimation approach.17 The fixed effects δjt control for unobserved attributes that vary
across trims or engine configurations, such as seating material or the presence of a sunroof.
Consequently, the interaction terms are identified by preference variation across demographic
groups, controlling for unobserved attribute variation across trims.18
Moreover, because
fixed effects control for mean sales by vehicle and year, first-stage preference parameters
are identified by within-vehicle market shares; especially low-selling vehicles, such as luxury
sports cars, do not affect the first-stage parameter estimates excessively. The identifying
assumption is that observed attributes account for all preference heterogeneity.
4.1.2
Second Stage: Preference Parameters of the Base Group
We define a vehicle by market fixed effect as δjt = P
k xjkt ¯βk + ξjt. The coefficient ¯βk is
the marginal utility for the base demographic group of attribute k.19 The term ξjt denotes
the unobserved mean utility across demographic groups for vehicle j in market t; ξjt includes
the combined utility from all other attributes that consumers value, such as cargo space or
seating comfort. In Equation (1), utility for the attributes omitted from xjkt can be included
17Berry et al. (1995) model preference heterogeneity using random coefficients.
The empirical design
assumes that the means and variances of the preference distributions are endogenous and exogenous. Train
and Winston (2007) adopt a similar but more explicit approach, which has a separate first stage, similar to
our methodology.
18In the first stage, we assume no heterogeneity in preferences for unobserved vehicle characteristics such
as seating material. In the second stage, we address the endogeneity of vehicle price, fuel economy and
performance, caused by the potential correlation between these characteristics and the unobserved attributes.
This approach is consistent with exogeneity assumptions made in mixed logit specifications (Berry et al. 2004;
Goolsbee and Petrin 2004; Train and Winston 2007). Also similar to Berry et al. (1995), we do not instrument
for buyer or group-specific price endogeneity. Berry et al. (1995) model heterogeneous preferences for product
attributes with random coefficients. The implicit assumption with estimating the random coefficients is that
the heterogeneous preferences are uncorrelated with individual specific error terms.
We adopt a weaker
assumption because we control for observed product attributes. However, we recognize that our approach
could still suffer from “first-stage endogeneity,” which is why we have added those vehicle attributes to the
first stage.
19It is common in the discrete choice literature to define the product’s mean utility and deviations from it,
such as in Berry et al. (1995). Instead, we define the utility of the base demographic group and differences
between it and that of other demographic groups.
20


===== [PAGE 24] =====

in ξjt, in which case, utility does not vary across households, or, if it does vary, it does so
randomly and is included in εijt.
It is common in the literature (see Goolsbee and Petrin (2004) and Train and Winston
(2007)) to recover the mean marginal utilities for the vehicle characteristics in a second stage,
in which the vehicle-market fixed effect is regressed on these attributes. By analogy, we could
estimate the marginal utilities for the base demographic group by regressing the estimated
fixed effects ˆδjt from Equation (8) on the seven attributes, all of which vary by vehicle and
year.
However, the vehicle-market fixed effects include both the observed attributes, xjkt, and
the unobserved utility, ξjt.
The latter includes attributes that are unobserved, such as
cabin comfort. According to the first-order condition for price in the profit maximization
problem (Equation (4)), price is an implicit function of the observed and unobserved nonprice
attributes of other vehicles sold by the manufacturer and those sold by other manufacturers.
For example, if a manufacturer redesigns the cabin to increase comfort, it may increase the
price because the improvement raises demand for that vehicle. Because unobserved cabin
comfort is correlated with the observed price, regressing the vehicle-market fixed effects on
observed price and other attributes would likely yield inconsistent results.
Berry et al. (1995) and many subsequent papers instrument for price using the attributes
of other vehicles, such as performance. This approach is based on the correlation between
a vehicle’s price and the attributes of other vehicles in the first-order condition for price in
the profit maximization problem (Equation (4)). It assumes that nonprice attributes are
exogenous, but the literature on the valuation of vehicle attributes has raised concerns that
these attributes, such as fuel economy and performance, may be correlated with unobserved
characteristics (Busse et al. (2013); Allcott and Wozny (2014); Sallee et al. (2016); Leard et al.
(2017)). Failing to control for this correlation can lead to inconsistent valuation estimates
for the nonprice attributes.
We address this possibility by introducing a new approach that builds on the traditional
IV approach. Specifically, we form three sets of moment conditions using three sources of
plausibly exogenous variation. Using the additional sources of variation, we instrument for
price and nonprice attributes (i.e., fuel economy and performance), unlike most prior vehicle
demand estimation that instruments only for price.20
Furthermore, nonprice attributes
have traditionally been used to construct instruments for price (Berry et al. 1995).
We
20These additional sources of variation are necessary to ensure enough correlation with the endogenous
attributes to reduce weak instruments bias.
21


===== [PAGE 25] =====

are unable to use fuel economy and performance as instruments because we assume that
they are endogenous.
The first source of variation derives from the first-order condition for price. Manufacturers
typically change some attributes more often than others. Attributes related to the power
train, such as fuel economy, can be adjusted frequently by retuning the engine or replacing
components of the engine and transmission.
On the other hand, manufacturers change
physical dimensions much less frequently, typically only during major redesigns every 5–7
years.
Based on this regularity, we develop the first moment condition using the sales-
weighted mean width, length, and height of vehicles sold by other manufacturers that belong
to the same market segment and the same attributes of other vehicles sold by the same
manufacturer but belonging to a different market segment. Denoting the price and share
parameter instruments by zjt, the moment condition for price is
G1 ¯β

=
T
X
t=1
Jt
X
j=1
(δjt −¯βxjt)zjt.
(9)
We argue that this condition is valid during the period in which width, length, and height
are fixed, or roughly 5–7 years. Product entry and exit generates variation within redesigns.
The second and third moment conditions are made possible by the detail of our vehicle
data and based on fuel economy and engine performance variation across closely related
vehicles. The second source of variation exploits our observation of many pairs of vehicles
that are identical in all aspects (market, make, model, trim/series, fuel type, drive type,
and body style) except that one has a higher-performance engine. Consequently, such twins
typically have the same seating material and other features, reducing concerns of omitted
variables bias. Table 2 provides information about the top five-selling twins. The twins help
identify WTP for performance and fuel costs because only engine size varies, which affects
both. The granular definition of a vehicle enables the second and third moment conditions,
as twins can only be defined at the submodel level. We form the second moment condition
by defining market by vehicle twin fixed effects, τjt:
G2 ¯β

=
T
X
t=1
Jt
X
j=1
x′
jt(δjt −¯βxjt −τjt).
(10)
For the third moment condition, we define φj as the interaction of all the attributes that
define a vehicle except its market. In the data, two vehicles that have a common value of
φj have the same make, model, trim/series, fuel type, drive type, body style, number of
22


===== [PAGE 26] =====

engine cylinders, and displacement. These vehicles may have different horsepower and fuel
economy, due to changes over time in the way an engine is tuned or differences in the specific
components in the engine or transmission. The moment condition is
G3 ¯β

=
T
X
t=1
Jt
X
j=1
x′
jt(δjt −¯βxjt −φj).
(11)
Whereas the second moment condition uses cross-sectional variation in performance and
fuel economy across twins sold in the same market, the third uses time series variation
in performance and fuel costs caused by adopting fuel-saving technology.
This moment
condition is similar to the identification strategy in Leard et al. (2017).21
An implicit
assumption is that changes in fuel economy and performance within the same vehicle are
uncorrelated with changes in other unobserved attributes that consumers value.
We estimate all second-stage parameters in ¯β with GMM and do so jointly instead of
individually because the variation we exploit likely influences multiple endogenous variables.
For instance, price may respond to fuel economy, given empirical evidence by Busse et al.
(2013); Langer and Miller (2013); Leard et al. (2017), among others. Furthermore, vehicle
prices and fuel costs are correlated with engine size, as illustrated in Table 2. The second
and third moment conditions provide complementary variation that improves identification,
compared to using one or the other. We stack the three moment conditions and use the
two-step GMM estimator.
Thus, the identification strategy addresses the bias arising from correlation between
observed and unobserved vehicle attributes.
The assumptions are that the physical
dimensions of other vehicles and variations of fuel economy and horsepower within τjt and
φj are uncorrelated with unobserved attributes. Because τjt and φj control for model and
trim, the coefficient estimates are consistent even if manufacturers package the engine and
transmission configuration with a particular trim. For example, many manufacturers offer a
“sport” trim that includes a larger engine. Even if it differs in other unobserved dimensions,
such as cabin features or exterior styling, τjt and φj control for such differences.22
21Leard et al. (2017) instrument for fuel economy and performance using engine technology adoption.
We avoid instrumenting to exploit all the variation over time in fuel economy and performance, including
technology adoption and engine retuning that is independent of technology adoption. We found that this is
necessary to have sufficient variation to identify the preference parameters for fuel economy and performance.
22Klier and Linn (2012) also address this source of endogeneity using proprietary information about engine
attributes. Our method does not require engine data and could be used by researchers who do not have
access to such data. Whitefoot et al. (2017) also instrument for endogenous vehicle attributes, but they
use as independent variables power train attributes that can vary between redesigns, potentially yielding
inconsistent estimates.
23


===== [PAGE 27] =====

4.2
Demand Estimation Results
Because the demand model includes a large number of parameters, we describe parameter
estimates that are most directly relevant to the counterfactuals:
price sensitivity and
marginal utility of fuel costs and performance. Figure 2 shows the average implied own-
price elasticity of demand for each of the five income groups. It varies from about –5 to –3
across the groups, with the middle group equaling −4.06. Lower-income households are more
price sensitive than higher-income households, a finding that is consistent with the literature
(Train and Winston 2007) and the summary statistics in Table 1, as low-income households
tend to buy less expensive vehicles.
Panel A of Figure 3 shows each income group’s implied WTP for a 1 percent fuel economy
increase. This equals the ratio of each group’s fuel economy and price coefficients. Lower-
income households tend to have a lower WTP for fuel economy.
In principle, low-income consumers could have lower WTP because they expect to drive
their vehicles fewer miles or have higher discount rates. To assess whether these factors
are driving their lower WTP, Figure 4 shows implied valuation ratios for fuel cost savings.
The ratio equals the WTP for a 1-percent fuel economy increase divided by the present
discounted value of the fuel cost savings caused by the increase. The ratio represents how
much households are willing to pay for a $1 reduction in lifetime fuel costs. Full valuation
that is consistent with a neoclassical model of decision making predicts a valuation ratio of
1. The Appendix describes assumptions for lifetime miles driven, private discount rates, and
expectations of gasoline prices needed to compute the ratios. Our estimates imply that most
demographic groups undervalue fuel costs, with a mean valuation ratio of 0.22.
This average valuation ratio is equivalent to approximately a 3-year payback period based
on the relationship between the valuation ratio and payback periods provided in Figure S.2
in the Supplementary Materials of Bento et al. (2018). This implied payback period is similar
to what the federal agencies implicitly assume about consumer valuation of fuel economy in
their analyses of the standards (NHTSA 2022).23
23The agencies assume a payback period of 2.5 years.
In the final RIA of the 2024-2026 standards,
NHTSA states “when assessing potential buyers’ likely response to requiring manufacturers to meet higher
fuel economy targets, we assume that buyers of new cars and light trucks value fuel costs over the first 30
months they own and use them.” (NHTSA 2022, p.81). This assumption significantly affects the overall
benefits they accrue to consumers due to tightening standards.
It also affects the extent to which the
standards change new vehicle sales due to changes in the price and fuel economy of new vehicles.
In
particular, NHTSA states “The [new vehicle] price elasticity acts on an adjusted average price increase,
by calculating the average price increase net of some portion of realized fuel savings (the first 30 months in
this analysis).” (NHTSA 2022, p.70).
24


===== [PAGE 28] =====

The valuation ratios vary from 0.09 to 0.56, with lower-income households tending toward
a lower valuation. This result is consistent with the summary data shown in Table 1, where
high-income households are more likely to purchase hybrid, plug-in hybrid, and electric
vehicles. On the other hand, the summary statistics also show that low-income households
purchase vehicles with slightly higher fuel economy, which at first appears inconsistent
with our estimated WTP patterns.
However, this relationship is explained by the fact
that inexpensive gasoline vehicles, such as small, entry-level cars, tend to have higher fuel
economy. After controlling for price sensitivity and other observed vehicle characteristics,
we find a positive relationship between income and WTP for fuel cost savings.
Panel B of Figure 3 shows WTP for a 1 percent horsepower increase; household
preferences vary considerably across income groups.
The average WTP for a 1 percent
increase in horsepower is $114. This is comparable to the estimates reported in Leard et al.
(2017), and within the range reported in Greene et al. (2018).
The positive correlation
between WTP and income is consistent with the pattern in Table 1, which shows that high-
income households buy more horsepower. Note that implied WTP from the demand model
is the ratio of the performance and price coefficients. Low-income households have a larger
(in magnitude) price coefficient and a smaller performance coefficient; overall, WTP for
horsepower increases with income because the horsepower coefficient increases more steeply
than the price coefficient decreases. Although not shown, differences in WTP across income
groups are statistically significant at the 5-percent level or better.
Next, we present results from two model validation exercises.
Figure A.2 shows the
predicted attribute means, by demographic group, against the observed sales-weighted
averages.
The values fall close to a 45-degree line, indicating that the model predicts
accurately the attribute means by demographic group.
We assess the model’s ability to predict market shares out of sample. Each panel in
Figure A.3 plots predicted market shares against observed 2018 market shares. The market
shares are computed by brand and class because we observe almost no brand–class entry and
exit. Panel A plots the no-change 2010-2018 forecast against observed 2018 market shares.
The scatter is considerably less if we use the demand model, as in Panel B, indicating that
the model outperforms a no-change forecast.
In our model, for a particular demographic group, the utility function parameters do
not vary across households or the vehicles they choose. To validate our assumption, we re-
estimate the model on a subset of our data. For each vehicle and market, we randomly sample
MY-vehicle-group observations and re-estimate the parameters using the chosen subsample.
25


===== [PAGE 29] =====

Then, we use the estimated coefficients to compute the market shares out of sample. If
the demand model assumptions were not valid, it would predict the out-of-sample market
shares poorly. However, Panel C shows that the predicted and observed market shares are
strongly correlated, and the correlation is nearly as strong as when we use the full sample
to estimate the demand parameters, as in Panel B. The similarity supports the assumption
that preferences for observed attributes do not vary within demographic groups.
4.3
Supply Estimation Strategy
We estimate the parameters of the supply model using first-order conditions of the
manufacturer problem (Equation (4)). The shadow price, trade-off between horsepower and
fuel economy, and marginal costs are estimated via pricing decisions and movement along the
production possibility frontier in Equation (6). We outline the strategy here; the Appendix
provides additional estimation details.
We begin by estimating the trade-off between fuel economy and horsepower (i.e., the
coefficient δh in Equation (6)). We assume that we measure fuel economy with error, and
we regress log fuel economy on log horsepower, vehicle weight, year fixed effects, and vehicle
fixed effects. A vehicle-year represents a unique observation, and the estimation is similar to
Knittel (2011). The horsepower coefficient is the elasticity of fuel economy to horsepower,
and it is identified by within-vehicle variation over time in choices of fuel economy and
horsepower.
Given the trade-off for fuel economy in Equation (6), we have three sets of first-order
conditions:
price, fuel economy, and fuel-saving technology.
For each vehicle j, these
conditions are
X
k∈Jf

pk −ck −λf
 1
mk
−1
Mk
 ∂qk
∂pj
+ qj = 0,
(12)
X
k∈Jf

pk −ck −λf
 1
mk
−1
Mk
  ∂qk
∂mj
+ ∂qk
∂hj
∂hj
∂mj
!
+ λf
1
(mj)2qj = 0,
(13)
X
k∈Jf

pk −ck −λf
 1
mk
−1
Mk
  ∂qk
∂mj
∂mj
∂Td(j)
+ ∂qk
∂hj
∂hj
∂Td(j)
!
−qj
∂cj
∂Td(j)
−
∂F
∂Td(j)
= 0. (14)
26


===== [PAGE 30] =====

The unknown parameters that we estimate are the J vehicle-specific marginal costs, ck,
the trade-off coefficient for horsepower and fuel economy in Equation (6) denoted by δh,
manufacturer-specific shadow costs, λf, and the derivative of fixed costs with respect to
technology. We estimate the parameters in a series of steps. In the first step, we initialize
a guess for the marginal costs ck. In the second, given this guess, we rearrange first-order
condition (13) such that the equation is linear in the manufacturer’s shadow costs, λf. We
then estimate a regression to fit a value for λf that minimizes the squared distance of the
linear equation. We do this separately for each set of manufacturer equations to obtain a
manufacturer-specific shadow cost. In the third step, with these estimated shadow costs, we
solve for marginal costs ck in the first-order condition (12). These estimated marginal costs
become our new guess of the marginal costs. We then repeat the second and third steps until
the change in marginal costs across iterations is sufficiently small (within 0.01 percent).
The final steps involve substituting estimates for the marginal costs ck and shadow costs
λf in Equation (14) and estimating technology costs and fixed costs. We assume that each
vehicle model has a unique fixed cost that varies linearly with the level of technology.
We estimate these fixed-cost coefficients and the marginal-cost coefficient γ with a linear
regression of Equation (14).
The fixed costs are identified by outward shifts of the frontier over time and the
assumption that the fixed costs rationalize observed technology choices. We estimate the
function governing technology costs, F(Td(j)). To simplify the estimation, we normalize each
model’s technology endowment to 0 in the first MY it is observed and assume that fixed
costs are a quadratic function of the technology change, Td(j). Under these assumptions,
∂F
∂Tj = 2σTk(j), where σ is a parameter to be estimated. Having estimated marginal costs ck
and shadow costs λf, Equation (14) is linear in technology and includes just the one unknown
parameter σ. Similar to the procedure for estimating λf, we estimate a regression to fit a
value for σ that minimizes the squared distance of the linear equation.
4.4
Supply Estimation Results
Tables 3–5 summarize the results of estimating the supply-side parameters. The first
column of Table 3 reports each firm’s mean marginal costs. The variation across firms is
intuitive; for example, Hyundai, which primarily sells low-price cars and crossovers, has lower
marginal costs than Daimler, which sells luxury vehicles.
The average fuel economy standard shadow cost per vehicle is computed by applying
the envelope theorem to the firm’s profit maximization problem. The shadow cost equals
27


===== [PAGE 31] =====

the derivative of the firm’s profits with respect to its fuel economy requirement and varies
substantially across manufacturers. For example, it is close to zero for Honda, which indicates
that Honda vehicles have similar average fuel economy to the levels required by the standards.
In contrast, it is nearly $3,000 for Fiat-Chrysler, which indicates that these vehicles have
lower fuel economy than the requirements. Note that the cross-firm variation in the table
accounts for the footprint-based standards. Compared to uniform standards that do not
depend on vehicle attributes, the footprint-based standards reduce cross-firm variation in
the average shadow price because firms selling larger vehicles are subject to lower standards.
The top panel of Table 4 shows the estimated trade-off between fuel economy and
horsepower for cars and light trucks (i.e., the coefficient δh in Equation (6)). The table
reports the horsepower coefficient, which is interpreted as an elasticity. The magnitudes
are twice as large as those estimated in Klier and Linn (2016). We are using more recent
data but otherwise the same methodology, which indicates that the trade-off has become less
severe over time.
The bottom panel of Table 4 reports the estimate of the efficiency coefficient in Equation
(7). To estimate these coefficients, we use the same sample as in the top panel (except for
dropping a few observations because of missing data). The dependent variable is the log of
marginal costs. The independent variable is the vehicle’s fuel-saving technology computed
using its fuel economy endowment in its initial year in the sample and estimates from Panel A
to impute fuel-saving technology levels for subsequent years. The coefficients are interpreted
as elasticities, and the estimate in the first column means that increasing a car’s efficiency
by 1 percent causes marginal costs to increase by 0.54 percent. The elasticity for trucks is
of similar magnitude. As we note in the introduction, these coefficients are larger than if
we estimate the same parameters using results from the 2011 NHTSA Regulatory Impact
Analysis of the 2017–2025 standards. In other words, based on observed fuel economy choices,
we estimate higher costs of increasing fuel economy than the agencies predicted.
Table 5 provides context for the estimated fixed costs of technology adoption.
Each
column shows the costs of increasing fuel economy by the percentage indicated in the column
heading.
We compare the increase in marginal costs with the increase in average fixed
costs—the ratio of the change in fixed costs to the vehicle’s sales. Marginal costs increase
roughly linearly with the fuel economy improvement. However, average fixed costs increase
rapidly. This is reasonable because raising fuel economy by more than a few percentage points
usually involves simultaneously adopting multiple fuel-saving technologies, which complicates
the redesign process. Because the standards required a 33 percent average fuel economy
28


===== [PAGE 32] =====

increase, the numbers in this table indicate that fixed costs play an important role in the
overall welfare analysis.
5
Welfare Analysis
This section describes the two central scenarios simulated to estimate the overall welfare
and distributional effects across income groups of tightening fuel economy standards from
2012 to 2022 levels.
We find that the standards have increased social welfare and been
progressive across income groups. The remainder of the section reports additional scenarios
that show that WTP for horsepower explains the progressivity of the standards.
5.1
Definition of Baseline and Central Policy Scenarios
In the baseline scenario, the standards are maintained at their 2012 levels for MYs
2012–2022. Figure A.1 shows that the standards tightened by about 33 percent over these 10
years. We use 2012 rather than 2011 because 2011 was a transitional year and manufacturers
had the option of complying with uniform or footprint-based standards.
The simulations are performed using the set of vehicles available in the market in 2018,
which is the most recent data year. We assume that the standards do not affect vehicle
entry, exit, or any attributes other than price, fuel economy, and horsepower.24 Under these
assumptions, the baseline scenario and any other scenario include the same set of vehicles.
Moreover, vehicle weight and mean utility (ξjt) do not vary across scenarios. Therefore, if
we define the set of vehicles in the simulations to include those sold in 2011, we would have
to impute weight and ξjt for each vehicle entering the market after 2011. Because about
18 percent of models and 70 percent of vehicles sold in 2018 entered after 2011, this would
require substantial imputation. We avoid having to impute ξjt by using data from the last
year, 2018. For these vehicles, we use the observed fuel prices, vehicle characteristics, fuel
economy requirements, and estimated marginal costs, fixed costs, and technology parameters
estimated using the methodology described in the previous section.
The model is static and includes two periods.
During the first period, the regulator
announces the level of the standards and the firm chooses a level of technology.
In the
baseline scenario, the standards correspond to the values of those actually applied to MY
24All welfare analyses of the standards have made these assumptions implicitly. Wollmann (2018) argues
that bankruptcy policy could affect product entry. In principle, fuel economy standards could also affect
entry and exit, but for computational reasons, we assume that these decisions are exogenous. Moreover,
we assume that standards do not affect redesign frequency, which is necessary because of the length of our
sample period. We are not aware of evidence that standards have affected redesign frequency.
29


===== [PAGE 33] =====

2012, depicted by the orange marks in Figure A.1. Because models are typically redesigned
every five years, we can conceive of the first period as representing 2011, when the standards
were determined, and the second period as representing the steady state in 2022, which is
10 years and two redesigns later.
We simulate the equilibrium in 2022 to approximate a steady state, using observed
national average fuel prices and market-wide new vehicle sales.
We do not model the
transitional dynamics of compliance with the standards, which is the same as most of the
literature (e.g., (Whitefoot et al. 2017)). However, unlike most of the literature, we interpret
the steady state as occurring 10 years after the standards are announced. That allows us to
account for technology adoption in a scenario in which standards do not tighten over time.
Note that the EPA and NHTSA welfare analysis models transitional dynamics.25
The equilibrium for the baseline scenario is found iteratively.26 On average, firms have to
increase fuel economy by about 1 mpg from 2011 levels to comply with the 2012 standards.
We determine the initial conditions for the simulation by assuming that manufacturers use
technology adoption, trade off horsepower in equal amounts, and do not adjust prices from
observed 2018 levels.
These assumptions determine initial conditions and not simulated
outcomes, and they are consistent with Klier and Linn (2016) and Reynaert (2021), who
find that standards have not caused manufacturers to adjust prices to encourage sales of
vehicles that exceed their fuel economy or GHG requirements. Starting from that initial
condition, each firm chooses technology (Tmt), fuel economy, and price to maximize profits.
Each decision is the best response given choices of all other firms in the market, and we loop
over firms and iterate across the entire market until simulated choices converge to within the
chosen tolerance.27
25The EPA and NHTSA analyses include banking and borrowing of credits over time and credit trading
across firms, as allowed under the regulations.
These provisions reduce compliance costs, relative to
regulations that do not include them. However, a few cross-firm credit trades have occurred (Leard and
McConnell 2017), suggesting that this provision has not affected compliance costs substantially. Between
2012 and 2022, most firms complied, on average.
Given the few cross-firm trades, it is likely that the
overcomplying firms are banking credits in anticipation of tighter standards.
A welfare analysis of the
2012–2022 standards should not include this overcompliance, as it is caused by standards that apply in later
years. For this reason, in the simulations, we assume that all firms exactly comply with the standards.
26Convergence of the model is not guaranteed; for a minority of vehicles, the model may cycle among two
or more sets of price and attributes. These situations typically affect lower-selling vehicles and vehicles sold
by small manufacturers.
27Specifically, the tolerance is set such that each firm’s average fuel consumption rate is within 0.1 percent
of its standard, and the maximum price change across iterations across vehicles in the market is 1 percent.
For a few firms, the model does not converge after 50 iterations; we use the simulated technology and
attributes from the final iteration. Achieving convergence is especially challenging for Jaguar–Land Rover,
which sells a small number of high-end vehicles and faces particularly stringent standards, but this company
accounts for less than 0.1 percent of total sales in the market.
30


===== [PAGE 34] =====

The central policy scenario is the same as the baseline, except that firms must achieve
the 2022 standards. Welfare effects are calculated by comparing equilibriums in the baseline
and central policy scenarios. The welfare analysis includes changes in consumer welfare,
manufacturer profits, and the global value of avoided carbon dioxide emissions.
To facilitate comparison with the agencies’ welfare analysis, we follow Allcott (2013)
and Train (2015) to adjust for consumer undervaluation and measure changes in consumer
welfare based on experienced utility. For this calculation, we assume a 3 percent real discount
rate for consistency with EPA (2010). We assume a rebound effect of 10 percent, which is
the same as the assumption the agencies make for the 2010 and 2011 analyses. Because
the welfare calculations correct for consumer undervaluation but do not include the benefits
from additional driving, we use the same Harberger approximation as EPA and NHTSA. All
plug-in vehicle subsidies are financed by lump-sum taxes on households in the market.
For firms, we compute profits by including fixed costs. Finally, we compute the social
damages of carbon dioxide emissions using estimates from EPA (2022), using the same 3
percent discount rate that we use for the fuel savings calculations.
Note that we do not include refueling time costs and external costs of fine particulate
matter, accidents, noise, congestion, and energy security. Estimating these costs and benefits
requires many assumptions that lie outside the scope of the paper.
However, EPA and
NHTSA estimate combined net welfare benefits of $7 billion for these categories, so including
them would strengthen our findings that the standards have increased social welfare.
5.2
Welfare Effects of 2022 Standards
Column (1) of Table 6 shows results for the baseline, which includes the 2012 standards.
The results pertain to a steady state using 2022 market conditions. The fuel economy credit
price is $76 per 1 percent improvement (raising a vehicle’s fuel economy by 1 percent would
provide the manufacturer with $76 worth of credits per unit of sales). Panel C shows that
vehicles sold in 2022 (the steady-state year) would emit 770 million metric tons of carbon
dioxide over their lifetimes, creating damages of $88 billion. The average fuel consumption
rate is 0.044 gallons per mile, which corresponds to 23 miles per gallon.28
Column (2) shows the results for the 2022 standards; comparing the first two columns
indicates the consequences of adopting the 2022 rather than 2012 levels.
Tightening
standards roughly doubles the fuel economy shadow price, causing manufacturers to adopt
technology that increases fuel efficiency by 4 percentage points (not shown in the table) and
28Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 report additional outcomes for the baseline and other scenarios.
31


===== [PAGE 35] =====

reduce average horsepower by about 19 percent. Average fuel economy increases by about
30 percent (Panel D). Panel B shows that the 2022 standards increase consumer welfare by
$74 billion, or $70 billion after subtracting the lump-sum taxes that finance the subsidies.
Tighter standards increase consumer welfare because consumers undervalue fuel cost
savings. The shadow price in column (1) is positive, which indicates that the 2012 standards
cause consumers to buy more fuel economy than they would without standards. However,
the 2012 standards do not fully correct for consumer undervaluation, which is why the 2022
standards increase consumer welfare. The implication is that the savings from the higher fuel
economy outweigh price changes and horsepower reductions caused by the tighter standards.
The standards reduce manufacturer profits by about $1 billion. Additional technology
adoption in the 2022 scenario causes fixed costs to increase by about $1 billion, and the fuel
economy improvements also increase marginal costs. That the reduction in profits is about
the same as the increase in fixed costs implies that manufacturers are (on average) able to
pass through to consumers the marginal but not fixed cost increases. This result underscores
the importance of including fixed costs in the model.
Panel E shows that the 2022 standards increase social welfare by about $83 billion.
The change in aggregate consumer surplus explains most of this gain, as the value of the
consumer welfare gains is about 4 times the value of the carbon dioxide reductions (Panel C).
The relative importance of the consumer welfare gains is consistent with EPA and NHTSA
analysis of the standards. It is tempting to compare our estimate of annual social welfare
gains ($83 billion) with the sum of the annual welfare gains from the agencies’ 2010 and 2011
welfare analyses ($103 billion). However, as we noted in Section 2, the agencies’ analyses
include differing assumptions, and it is not appropriate to simply add the two. Nonetheless,
our estimates are broadly consistent with theirs, if a bit lower.
The Appendix provides
additional comparisons between our analysis and theirs.
Figure 5 shows the consumer welfare changes by income group. The Estimated bars
represent the per-household change between the 2022 and 2012 standards (the difference
between columns (2) and (1) in Table 6). Welfare increases for all income groups, and the
2022 standards are progressive, as the increase is negatively correlated with income.
5.3
Why Are the Standards Progressive?
This subsection reports results of additional scenarios that investigate the source of
the progressivity illustrated in Figure 5; In the introduction, we note three potential
explanations. First, low-income consumers undervalue fuel cost savings by more than high-
32


===== [PAGE 36] =====

income consumers, indicating that they may benefit more from fuel economy increases that
tighter standards cause. Second, low-income consumers have lower WTP for horsepower
and may care less about horsepower reductions.
Third, low-income consumers are more
price sensitive, and manufacturers may be less able to pass through cost increases to prices
for vehicles that they are most likely to purchase.
Columns (3)–(10) of Table 6 investigate the first explanation. Each scenario includes
the level of stringency indicated in the first row of the table. To illustrate the effects of
undervaluation on progressivity, we define scenarios that reduce its extent in one of two
ways. The first involves multiplying the fuel cost coefficient in the utility function by 2 or
4, where the latter nearly eliminates undervaluation on average (the average valuation ratio
across income groups is 0.22). The second way involves increasing each group’s fuel cost
parameter to cut the group’s undervaluation in half (columns (7) and (9)) or to eliminate it
(columns (8) and (10). The two approaches differ in that the first approach increases WTP
of all groups by the same proportion, whereas the second increases WTP by more for the
low-income groups, because they have larger undervaluation.
Table 6 reports the aggregate welfare results for these scenarios. Reducing undervaluation
diminishes the welfare gains of the 2022 standards, and full valuation (columns (8) and (10))
causes the 2022 standards to reduce social welfare. This is consistent with the importance of
the consumer welfare gains in column (2) in driving the overall welfare gains. In fact, with
full valuation, tighter standards harm consumers on average. Note that tighter standards
benefit consumers with more modest undervaluation than what we estimate; see Panel E for
columns (5) and (9).29
In Figure 5, the bars show the welfare changes by income group for the alternative
assumptions on consumer preferences. In all cases, the tighter standards remain progressive,
as they increase consumer welfare by more (or decrease it by less) for the low-income
compared to the high-income groups. Thus, we conclude that undervaluation is not driving
the estimated progressivity of the standards.
Table 7 and Figure 6 report results from scenarios that consider the other potential
explanations of progressivity: horsepower WTP and price sensitivity. Columns (11) and
(12) replace each group’s performance coefficient with the mean across all groups, and
columns (13) and (14) replace each group’s price coefficient with the mean coefficient. Table
7 shows that these alternative values do not significantly affect the overall welfare results. For
29Increasing the fuel cost parameters in these scenarios affects the levels of consumer welfare in the 2012
and 2022 standards. Our interest lies in the difference between the two scenarios rather than the levels in
any scenario.
33


===== [PAGE 37] =====

example, the 2022 standards increase welfare by $80 and $75 billion, rather than $83 billion.
However, Figure 6 shows that using the mean horsepower coefficient reduces the standards’
progressivity. In contrast, using the mean price coefficient retains the progressivity. We
conclude from these results that the WTP for horsepower drives the estimated progressivity,
demonstrating the importance of including welfare changes caused by attribute changes in
evaluating the distributional effects.
6
Conclusion
The US market for new passenger vehicles presents a challenge to analyzing the welfare
effects of fuel economy and GHG standards.
Despite the numerous studies of consumer
demand for new vehicles, the literature estimating welfare effects of the standards has
largely ignored three key supply-side factors:
trade-offs between performance and fuel
economy, technology adoption that would occur without the standards, and fixed costs of
that adoption.
Moreover, welfare estimates have ignored the possibility that consumers
systematically undervalue fuel costs when purchasing a vehicle, and the literature has not
considered the implications of vehicle attribute changes for the distributional effects of the
standards.
We analyze the fuel economy and GHG standards that covered MYs 2012–2022, using
an equilibrium model of the passenger vehicles market that addresses these supply and
behavioral factors. In the demand component of the model, consumers choose among a highly
differentiated set of vehicles; preferences for price and attributes vary across demographic
groups. Using data from a household survey of recent vehicle buyers, we estimate substantial
preference heterogeneity across demographic groups. In particular, low-income households
tend to be more price sensitive and value fuel cost savings and performance less than high-
income households. Consistent with recent literature, on average, consumers undervalue fuel
cost savings and prefer increases in horsepower to increases in fuel economy.
In the supply component of the model, manufacturers choose prices, fuel economy,
horsepower, and fuel-saving technology, where technology adoption increases both fixed and
marginal costs. We estimate all cost parameters using first-order conditions to a firm’s profit
maximization problem and observed attribute choices.
We simulate two central scenarios, which represent maintaining the 2012 level of standards
from 2012 through 2022 (the baseline) and tightening standards to 2022 levels (the central
policy case). In both scenarios, the regulatory agencies announce the standards in 2012
and we simulate the steady state equilibrium in 2022.
In the intervening 10 years,
34


===== [PAGE 38] =====

manufacturers can adjust prices to boost market shares of vehicles that exceed their fuel
economy requirements, adopt fuel-saving technology, or trade off horsepower.
We find that the 2022 standards increased social welfare by $83 billion for vehicles sold in
2022, which is broadly similar to ex ante predictions by the regulatory agencies. Consumer
welfare gains, rather than carbon dioxide emissions reductions, account for most of the overall
gains, which is consistent with the agencies’ predictions. Consumer welfare increases because
of the large amount of undervaluation that we estimate, which demonstrates the importance
of undervaluation in justifying tighter standards; without it, the 2022 standards decrease
social welfare by about $14 billion. Our total welfare estimates appear to be smaller than
the agencies’ ex ante predictions, although we find that the standards have increased total
welfare substantially. However, the models they employ to quantify benefits and costs of
standards are not capable of estimating distributional consequences of the standards across
consumer groups.
We find that the 2022 standards are progressive due to features of supply and demand. On
the supply side, manufacturers comply partly by trading off horsepower. On the demand side,
we estimate that high-income households have a stronger preference for engine performance
(i.e., horsepower). Together, these forces imply that the benefits of the standards concentrate
among new vehicle buyers on the low end of the income distribution.
Our model focuses on the new-vehicle market to address the shortcomings in the
literature. We follow EPA (2012) to incorporate the effects of standards on vehicle use.
Accounting for changes in used vehicle scrappage would not overturn the main conclusion
that the standards have increased social welfare.
During our period of analysis, plug-in vehicles (all-electric or plug-in hybrid) accounted
for less than 5 percent of the market; for simplicity, our model allows for limited preference
heterogeneity across demographic groups for plug-in vehicles. However, the market share of
these vehicles is expected to continue rising. Although our work is focused on evaluating
standards during a period where plug-in vehicles played a minor role in compliance, we
anticipate that they will be much more important in the coming years as manufacturers
transition their fleets away from the internal combustion engine.
Plug-in vehicles have
considerable trade-offs when compared to gasoline vehicles, including significant differences
in price, driving range, refueling time, and horsepower. We expect that our framework that
accounts for these trade-offs on both the consumer and producer sides of the new vehicle
market will be useful for understanding the social welfare implications of future changes to
the standards.
35


===== [PAGE 39] =====

References
Ackerberg, D. A. and M. Rysman (2005). Unobserved product differentiation in discrete-choice
models: Estimating price elasticities and welfare effects. RAND Journal of Economics 36(4),
1–19.
Allcott, H. (2013). The welfare effects of misperceived product costs: Data and calibrations from
the automobile market. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(3), 30–66.
Allcott, H. and M. Greenstone (2012). Is there an energy efficiency gap?
Journal of Economic
Perspectives 14(5), 3–28.
Allcott, H. and N. Wozny (2014). Gasoline prices, fuel economy, and the energy paradox. Review
of Economics and Statistics 96, 779–795.
Bento, A., K. Roth, and Y. Zuo (2018). Vehicle lifetime trends and scrappage behavior in the US
used car market. The Energy Journal 39(1).
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995).
Automobile prices in market equilibrium.
Econometrica 63(4), 841–890.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (2004). Differentiated products demand systems from a
combination of micro and macro data: The new car market. Journal of Political Economy 112(1),
68–105.
Blonigen, B. A., C. R. Knittel, and A. Soderbery (2017).
Keeping it fresh: Strategic product
redesigns and welfare. International Journal of Industrial Organization 53, 170–214.
Busse, M., C. Knittel, and F. Zettelmeyer (2013). Are consumers myopic? Evidence from new and
used car purchases. American Economic Review 103(1), 220–256.
Chen, Y. and P. G. Gayle (2019). Mergers and product quality: Evidence from the airline industry.
International Journal of Industrial Organization 62, 96–135.
Davis, L. W. and C. R. Knittel (2016). Are fuel economy standards regressive? NBER Working
Paper No. 22925. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
EPA (2010).
Regulatory Impact Analysis: Final Rulemaking to Establish Light-Duty Vehicle
Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards. EPA-
420-R-10-009 April 2010.
EPA (2012). Regulatory Impact Analysis: Final Rulemaking for 2017–2025 Light-Duty Vehicle
Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards. EPA-
420-R-12-016 August 2012.
EPA (2022). Supplementary Material for the Regulatory Impact Analysis for the Supplemental
Proposed Rulemaking,“Standards of Performance for New, Reconstructed, and Modified Sources
and Emissions Guidelines for Existing Sources: Oil and Natural Gas Sector Climate Review”.
EPA-HQ-OAR-2021-0317 September 2022.
EPA, CARB, and NHTSA (2016). Draft Technical Assessment Report: Midterm Evaluation of
Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy
36


===== [PAGE 40] =====

Standards for Model Years 2022–2025. EPA-420-D-16-900 July 2016.
Ganapati, S., J. Shapiro, and R. Walker (2018). The incidence of carbon taxes in US manufacturing:
Lessons from energy cost pass-through.
NBER Working Paper No. 22281. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gillingham, K., S. Houde, and A. Van Benthem (2019). Consumer myopia in vehicle purchases:
Evidence from a natural experiment.
NBER Working Paper No. 25845. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goldberg, P. K. (1995). Product differentiation and oligopoly in international markets: The case
of the US automobile industry. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 891–951.
Goldberg, P. K. (1998). The effects of the corporate average fuel efficiency standards in the US.
The Journal of Industrial Economics 46(1), 1–33.
Goolsbee, A. and A. Petrin (2004). The consumer gains from direct broadcast satellites and the
competition with cable tv. Econometrica 72(2), 351–381.
Greene, D., A. Hossain, J. Hofmann, G. Helfand, and R. Beach (2018). Consumer willingness to
pay for vehicle attributes: What do we know?
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice 118, 258–279.
Houde, S. (2018). The incidence of course certification: Evidence from the energy star program.
Technical report, HEC Lausanne.
Houde, S. and C. A. Spurlock (2015). Do energy efficiency standards improve quality? Evidence
from a revealed preference approach.
Ito, K. and J. M. Sallee (2018). The economics of attribute-based regulation: Theory and evidence
from fuel economy standards. Review of Economics and Statistics 100(2), 319–336.
Jacobsen, M. (2013).
Evaluating U.S. fuel economy standards in a model with producer and
consumer heterogeneity. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(2).
Jacobsen, M. and A. van Benthem (2015).
Vehicle scrappage and gasoline policy.
American
Economic Review 105(3), 1312–1338.
Johnson, J. P. and A. Rhodes (2021). Multiproduct mergers and quality competition. The RAND
Journal of Economics 52(3), 633–661.
Klier, T. and J. Linn (2012). New vehicle characteristics and the cost of the corporate average fuel
economy standard. RAND Journal of Economics 43(1), 186–213.
Klier, T. and J. Linn (2016). The effect of vehicle fuel economy standards on technology adoption.
Journal of Public Economics 133, 41–63.
Knittel, C. (2011). Automobiles on steroids: Product attribute trade-offs and technological progress
in the automobile sector. American Economic Review 101(7), 3368–3399.
Knittel, C. R. and K. Metaxoglou (2014). Estimation of random-coefficient demand models: two
empiricists’ perspective. Review of Economics and Statistics 96(1), 34–59.
37


===== [PAGE 41] =====

Langer, A. and N. Miller (2013). Automakers’ short-run responses to changing gasoline prices.
Review of Economics and Statistics 95(4), 1198–1211.
Leard, B. (2022). Estimating consumer substitution between new and used passenger vehicles.
Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 9(1), 27–49.
Leard, B., J. Linn, and V. McConnell (2017).
Fuel prices, new vehicle fuel economy, and
implications for attribute-based standards. Journal of the Association of Environmental and
Resource Economists 4(3), 659–700.
Leard, B., J. Linn, and Y. Zhou (2017).
How much do consumers value fuel economy and
performance?
Evidence from technology adoption.
Report. Washington, DC: Resources for
the Future.
Leard, B. and V. McConnell (2017).
New markets for pollution and energy efficiency: Credit
trading under automobile greenhouse gas and fuel economy standards. Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 11(2), 207–226.
Levinson, A. (2016). Energy efficiency standards are more regressive than energy taxes: Theory
and evidence. NBER Working Paper No. 22956. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Linn, J. and X. Dou (2020). How do US passenger vehicle fuel economy standards affect purchases
of new and used vehicles? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 102.
National Research Council (2015). Cost, effectiveness, and deployment of fuel economy technologies
for light-duty vehicles. Washington DC: National Academies Press.
NHTSA (2022).
Final Regulatory Impact Analysis: Final Rulemaking for Model Years 2024-
2026 Light-Duty Vehicle Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards.
U.S. Department of
Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Office of Regulatory Analysis
and Evaluation, National Center for Statistics and Analysis, Washington, D.C..
Petrin, A. (2002). Quantifying the benefit of new products: the case of minivan. Journal of Political
Economy 110, 705–729.
Reynaert, M. (2021). Abatement Strategies and the Cost of Environmental Regulation: Emission
Standards on the European Car Market. Review of Economic Studies 88(1), 454–488.
Sallee, J., S. West, and W. Fan (2016). Do consumers recognize the value of fuel economy? Evidence
from used car prices and gasoline price fluctuations. Journal of Public Economics 134, 61–73.
Train, K. (2015). Welfare calculations in discrete choice models when anticipated and experienced
attributes differ: A guide with examples. Journal of Choice Modelling 16, 15–22.
Train, K. E. and C. Winston (2007). Vehicle choice behavior and the declining market share of
U.S. automakers. International Economic Review 48, 1469–1496.
Weyl, E. and M. Fabinger (2013). Pass-through as an economic tool: Principles of incidence under
imperfect competition. Journal of Political Economy 121(3), 528–583.
38


===== [PAGE 42] =====

Whitefoot, K. S., M. L. Fowlie, and S. J. Skerlos (2017).
Compliance by design: Influence of
acceleration tradeoffs on CO2 emissions and costs of fuel economy and greenhouse gas regulations.
Environmental Science and Technology 51(18), 10307–10315.
Wollmann, T. G. (2018).
Trucks without bailouts:
Equilibrium product characteristics for
commercial vehicles. American Economic Review 108(6), 1364–1406.
Figures
39


===== [PAGE 43] =====

Figure 1: Trends in Vehicle Attributes, 2010–2018
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
31
33
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Panel A: Fuel economy (miles per gallon)
Cars
Light trucks
-2.9
-2.89
-2.88
-2.87
-2.86
-2.85
-2.84
-2.83
-2.82
-2.81
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Panel B: Log (horsepower / weight)
Cars
Light trucks
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
45,000
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Panel C: Transaction price (2018 dollars)
Cars
Light trucks
Notes: The figure shows the sales-weighted average attributes of all new cars and light trucks
sold in the United States between 2010 and 2018.
40


===== [PAGE 44] =====

Figure 2: Own-Price Elasticity of Demand by Income Group
-6.0
-5.0
-4.0
-3.0
-2.0
-1.0
0.0
<$44k
$44-91k
$91-123k
$123-185k
>$185k
Notes: Each bar shows the own-price elasticity of demand for the indicated income group. The estimates
are computed from the estimated demand model coefficients, and all estimates are weighted across vehicles
and markets using predicted market shares as weights.
41


===== [PAGE 45] =====

Figure 3: Willingness to Pay for Fuel Economy and Performance by Income Group
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
<$44k
$44-91k
$91-123k
$123-185k
>$185k
Panel A: Willingness to pay for 1-percent fuel economy increase ($)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
<$44k
$44-91k
$91-123k
$123-185k
>$185k
Panel B: Willingness to pay for 1-percent horsepower increase ($)
Notes: Panel A reports the WTP for a 1 percent fuel economy increase, and Panel B reports the WTP for a
1 percent performance increase in 2018$. Each bar shows the estimate for the indicated demographic group.
The estimates are computed from the estimated demand model coefficients, and all estimates are weighted
across vehicles and markets using predicted market shares as weights.
42


===== [PAGE 46] =====

Figure 4: Estimated Valuation Ratios by Income Group
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
<$44k
$44-91k
$91-123k
$123-185k
>$185k
Notes: The figure uses the WTP estimates from Figure 3. See Appendix for details on the calculations.
43


===== [PAGE 47] =====

Figure 5: Consumer Surplus Changes by Income Group (2022–2012 Standards): Baseline
and Alternative Fuel Cost Parameters
-1,500
-1,000
-500
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
Lowest (<$44k)
Second ($44-91k)
Third ($91-123k)
Fourth ($123-185k)
Highest (>$185k)
Estimated
Multiply by 2
Multiply by 4
Cut undervaluation in half
Full valuation
Notes: The figure reports the average consumer welfare change per household in 2018$ by income group
and scenario. The estimated results correspond to scenarios in Table 6. The Estimated bars represent the
scenarios in columns 1 and 2, the Multiply by 2 bars represent scenarios in columns 3 and 5, the Multiply
by 4 bars represent scenarios in columns 4 and 6, the Cut undervaluation in half bars represent scenarios in
columns 7 and 9, and the Full valuation bars represent scenarios in columns 8 and 10.
44


===== [PAGE 48] =====

Figure 6: Consumer Surplus Changes by Income Group (2022–2012 Standards): Alternative
Horsepower and Price Coefficients
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1,800
2,000
Lowest (<$44k)
Second ($44-91k)
Third ($91-123k)
Fourth ($123-185k)
Highest (>$185k)
Mean hp
Mean price sensitivity
Notes: The figure reports the average consumer welfare change per household in 2018$ by income group
and scenario. The estimated results correspond to scenarios in Table 7. The Mean hp bars represent the
scenarios in columns 11 and 12; the Mean price sensitivity bars represent scenarios in columns 13 and 14.
45


===== [PAGE 49] =====

Tables
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Vehicle attribute
Pooled
sample
Income group
<$44k
$44-91k
$91-
123k
$123-
185k
>$185k
Transaction price
(2018$)
35,411
29,664
33,744
37,061
40,024
48,069
(12,537)
(8,258)
(9,876)
(11,499
(12,983)
(16,794)
Miles per gallon
25.51
26.70
25.48
24.83
24.63
24.16
(8.18)
(6.46)
(7.36)
(8.15)
(9.56)
(11.48)
Cost per mile (2018 $)
0.130
0.122
0.129
0.134
0.136
0.140
(0.044)
(0.040)
(0.043)
(0.045)
(0.045)
(0.046)
Horsepower/weight
0.059
0.056
0.059
0.060
0.062
0.065
(0.013)
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.015)
Footprint
49.23
47.78
49.23
49.98
50.33
51.04
(6.66)
(6.46)
(6.68)
(6.76)
(6.61)
(6.26)
Cylinders
5.029
4.660
4.982
5.200
5.333
5.606
(1.384)
(1.203)
(1.342)
(1.406)
(1.441)
(1.541)
Hybrid share
0.026
0.020
0.027
0.030
0.032
0.031
(0.160)
(0.140)
(0.161)
(0.172)
(0.176)
(0.174)
Plug-in hybrid share
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.006
(0.051)
(0.032)
(0.043)
(0.055)
(0.066)
(0.080)
Electric share
0.004
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.007
0.014
(0.062)
(0.032)
(0.045)
(0.058)
(0.081)
(0.116)
Car share
0.461
0.565
0.452
0.399
0.382
0.362
(0.498)
(0.496)
(0.498)
(0.490)
(0.486)
(0.481)
SUV share
0.387
0.297
0.382
0.430
0.461
0.514
(0.487)
(0.457)
(0.486)
(0.495)
(0.498)
(0.500)
All wheel drive share
0.235
0.151
0.214
0.262
0.304
0.402
(0.424)
(0.358)
(0.411)
(0.440)
(0.460)
(0.490)
Notes:
The data include sales counts and characteristics of passenger vehicles sold during 2010-2018.
Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.
46


===== [PAGE 50] =====

Table 2: Attribute Comparison for Highest-Selling 2015 Engine Twin Vehicles
Name
Engine
displ.
(liters)
Price
(2018 $)
Miles
per
gallon
Horsepower
/ weight
(pounds)
2015
sales
Sales
share
(%)
Toyota Camry FWD
2.5
26,171
28
0.045
293,249
2.18
3.5
31,648
25
0.077
14,919
0.11
Nissan Altima FWD
2.5
26,041
28
0.057
240,552
1.79
3.5
31,015
26
0.079
8,064
0.06
Ford F150 XL Gas
2.7
36,486
22
0.079
46,401
0.34
3.5
36,227
19.5
0.085
197,240
1.47
Subaru Forester Touring
2
32,974
25
0.069
9,564
0.07
2.5
28,232
27
0.050
154,107
1.15
Chevrolet Silverado 1500
4.3
34,280
18.3
0.059
58,277
0.43
5.3
39,877
18.6
0.073
84,493
0.63
Notes: The table reports vehicle characteristics and sales of the top five highest-selling vehicle twins during
the 2015 market year. Twins are vehicle pairs that share the same model year, make, model, trim name,
fuel type, body style, and drive type but have different engine configurations. The sales share is the vehicle’s
sales multiplied by 100 and divided by total new vehicle sales in 2015.
47


===== [PAGE 51] =====

Table 3: Estimated Marginal Costs, Shadow Costs, and Markups by Manufacturer
Firm
Marginal costs
($/vehicle)
Fuel economy
standard shadow cost
($/vehicle)
Percentage markup
General Motors
29,795
1,650
24
Toyota
24,594
1,637
25
Ford
27,313
1,743
24
Fiat Chrysler
23,747
2,803
24
Honda
20,892
91
28
Nissan
21,862
1,144
27
Hyundai
16,874
1,133
30
Subaru
19,849
877
27
Volkswagen
24,897
1,852
25
Mazda
19,135
796
28
BMW
37,398
1,819
21
Daimler
41,945
1,951
19
Tesla
81,372
-27,168
22
Volvo
42,219
806
18
Notes: The table shows the sales-weighted mean marginal costs, fuel economy shadow cost, and percentage
markup using observations from 2018. The standard shadow cost is computed from the last term in Equation
(13). Markup is the difference between the transaction price and the sum of marginal costs and shadow cost.
48


===== [PAGE 52] =====

Table 4: Estimated Fuel Economy–Horsepower Trade-Off and Marginal Cost Function
Panel A. Dependent variable is log fuel economy
Cars
Trucks
Log horsepower
–0.55
–0.69
(0.04)
(0.06)
N
5,863
5,801
R-squared
0.986
0.949
Panel B. Dependent variable is log marginal costs
Cars
Trucks
Fuel-saving technology
0.54
0.59
(0.11)
(0.11)
N
5,845
5,785
R-squared
0.863
0.735
Change in marginal costs per mpg
716
999
(140)
(161)
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses, robust to heteroskedasticity. Panel A reports estimates
of the horsepower coefficient in Equation (6). Each column reports the results from estimating
a regression in which the dependent variable is log fuel economy and independent variables
include the log of horsepower, year fixed effects, and vehicle fixed effects. A vehicle and year
represent a unique observation. Panel B reports results from similar regressions, except that the
dependent variable is the log of estimated marginal costs and the independent variable is fuel-
saving technology, computed from Equation (6).
49


===== [PAGE 53] =====

Table 5: Changes in Marginal Costs and Average Fixed Costs from Raising Fuel Economy
Percentage efficiency increase
1
5
10
Marginal costs (2018 $)
150
745
1474
(61)
(302)
(599)
{139}
{688}
{1362}
Average fixed costs (2018 $)
5
122
488
(50)
(1243)
(4972)
{2}
{40}
{161}
Notes: Each cell reports the mean with standard deviation in parentheses and
the median in brackets. The top three rows report marginal costs of increasing
fuel economy by the percentage indicated in the column heading. The bottom
three rows report average fixed costs of increasing fuel economy.
50


===== [PAGE 54] =====

Table 6: Welfare Effects of 2022 Standards: Baseline and Alternative Fuel Cost Parameters
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Year of standards
2012
2022
2012
2012
2022
2022
2012
2012
2022
2022
Cost-per-mile
coefficient
Estimated
Estimated
Multiply
by 2
Multiply
by 4
Multiply
by 2
Multiply
by 4
Reduce
under-
valuation
50 percent
No under-
valuation
Reduce
under-
valuation
50 percent
No under-
valuation
Panel A: Credit prices
Fuel economy
($/1% mpg
improvement)
76
151
29
15
127
105
19
15
121
91
Panel B: Private welfare
Consumer welfare
(billion $)
367
441
638
940
687
936
720
1076
748
1059
Profits (billion $)
114
113
115
114
113
112
115
114
113
113
Subsidy expenditure
(billion $)
4
8
3
3
6
4
3
3
6
4
Panel C: CO2 emissions and damages
Emissions
(billion metric tons)
0.77
0.63
0.78
0.72
0.64
0.64
0.78
0.69
0.64
0.65
Damages (billion $))
87
71
88
81
72
72
88
78
72
73
Panel D: Log (horsepower / weight), fuel consumption rate
Log (horsepower /
weight)
-2.68
-2.89
-2.69
-2.78
-2.91
-2.93
-2.69
-2.85
-2.93
-2.96
Fuel consumption rate
(gallons / mile)
0.044
0.036
0.045
0.041
0.036
0.036
0.045
0.039
0.036
0.036
Panel E: Social welfare
Total welfare (billion $)
391
474
661
970
772
972
744
1109
784
1095
Welfare change
(2022 - 2012 standards,
billion $)
83.3
61.2
1.8
39.8
-14.5
Notes: Each column reports outcomes for 2022 from adopting fuel economy standards in 2017. Level of standard refers to the model year of the NHTSA
footprint coefficients. The table uses the estimated horsepower and price coefficients. Columns 1 and 2 use the estimated cost-per-mile coefficients. Columns
3–6 multiply the coefficients by the factor indicated in the row heading; columns 5 and 6 imply almost no undervaluation on average. Columns 7–10 scale
cost-per-mile coefficients by the gap between the demographic group’s valuation ratio and full valuation. The fuel economy credit price is the value of a
1 percent fuel economy improvement, holding fixed all market shares. Consumer welfare includes welfare changes caused by changes in vehicle prices, fuel
economy, and horsepower using the present discounted value of fuel costs over the vehicle’s lifetime. Emissions and damages reflect emissions over the lifetimes
of the vehicles. Total welfare is the sum of consumer welfare and profits, net of subsidy expenditure and CO2 damages.
51


===== [PAGE 55] =====

Table 7: Welfare Effects of 2022 Standards: Alternative Horsepower and Price Coefficients
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Year of standards
2012
2022
2012
2022
Horsepower coefficient
Mean for
all groups
Mean for
all groups
Estimated
Estimated
Price coefficient
Estimated
Estimated
Mean for
all groups
Mean for
all groups
Panel A: Credit prices
Fuel economy ($/1% mpg
improvement)
77
162
76
144
Panel B: Private welfare
Consumer welfare (billion
$)
361
441
368
442
Profits (billion $)
115
113
115
114
Subsidy expenditure
(billion $)
4
9
5
9
Panel C: CO2 emissions and damages
Emissions (billion metric
tons)
0.77
0.63
0.77
0.63
Damages (billion $))
87
81
87
81
Panel D: Log (horsepower / weight), fuel consumption rate
Log (horsepower / weight)
-2.68
-2.87
-2.67
-2.86
Fuel consumption rate
(gallons / mile)
0.448
0.363
0.447
0.364
Panel E: Social welfare
Total welfare (billion $)
385
474
392
476
Welfare change (2022 -
2012 standards, billion $)
89.1
83.9
Notes: Each column reports outcomes for year 2022 from adopting fuel economy standards in 2012 (identical to
Table 6, except that the scenarios include the parameter assumptions indicated in the second row of the table).
52


===== [PAGE 56] =====

Appendix
Data
This section provides further details on the data construction. For each unique vehicle and
MY, we compute the average transaction price in InMoment and assign this as its purchase
price. For the 10 percent of vehicles without reported transaction prices, we estimate based
on the most closely related vehicle in the data with an observed transaction price.
For
example, suppose that some other observations of vehicles with the same make, model, trim,
model year, and purchase year have reported transaction prices. For the matching vehicles
with nonmissing data, we compute the average difference between MSRP and transaction
price (in dollars). For the vehicle with a missing transaction price, the imputed price is
the sum of its MSRP and the calculated difference between transaction price and MSRP.
We repeat this procedure by sequentially aggregating the vehicle definition until we obtain
imputed prices for all vehicles in the InMoment data.
As noted in the main text, we use the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) data to
weight household observations in the InMoment data.
The CEX samples about 7,000
US households each quarter, and, importantly for our purposes, the survey data include
demographic information and whether the household purchased a new or used vehicle in the
current quarter or the quarter before being surveyed. We use the CEX survey weights to
compute the total new and used vehicles obtained by demographic group and year.
We construct weights for the InMoment household observations in three steps. First, we
construct a weight variable so that the total new purchases by MY and demographic group
matches total new purchases by year and demographic group in the CEX. Second, we adjust
the household weights so that the vehicle’s share of sales in total sales by MY equals the
corresponding share according to the IHS data. Third, we adjust the household weights so
that total new vehicles obtained by MY in the InMoment data match total vehicles obtained
by year in the IHS data. After constructing these weights, we compute the total new vehicles
obtained by MY, vehicle, and demographic group.
This approach assumes implicitly that variation in survey response rates across
demographic groups is orthogonal to such variation across vehicles.
Reversing the order
has little effect on the estimated parameters of the consumer demand model.
53


===== [PAGE 57] =====

Model and Estimation
Derivation of Market Share Equation
We derive the market share Equation (3). We begin by observing that the household’s
utility from purchasing a vehicle is the same as the utility another household in the same
demographic group g would experience from choosing the same vehicle, so that vijt ≡vgjt.
Consequently, the probability that the household chooses a particular vehicle is the same for
all households belonging to g, and we can aggregate the choice probabilities to market shares
by demographic group, vehicle, and market:
sgjt =
evgjt
P
l evglt .
(A.1)
Taking the natural log of both sides of Equation (A.1) yields
ln(sgjt) = vgjt −ln(
X
l
vglt).
(A.2)
Normalizing the utility of the outside good to 0 for each demographic group implies that
ln sg0t = −ln(P
l vglt). Substituting this log share into Equation (A.2), rearranging, and
substituting the definition of utility from Equation (1) yields the market share equation in
the main text, Equation (3).
Definition of the Outside Option
We review how the literature handles the outside option and argue that in our setting,
conditioning on buying a vehicle (new or used) is appropriate. Berry et al. (1995; 2004) and
Petrin (2002) define the outside good as the decision to not buy a new vehicle. Consequently,
their choice models apply to all US households during their sample periods. The models can
be used to simulate the effects of a policy or vehicle entry and exit on total new vehicle sales
and consumer welfare.
In contrast, many recent vehicle demand models exclude an outside good because utility
from this option does not represent a structural parameter (Train and Winston 2007); it
is often normalized to zero and therefore is unaffected by policy changes (Berry et al.
1995; 2004).
As a result, including the outside good in the demand model estimation
and postestimation simulation exercises may provide inconsistent inferences about welfare.
Furthermore, the definition of utility from the outside good is broad and not well defined.
54


===== [PAGE 58] =====

Households deciding not to buy a new vehicle in a given period do so for many different
reasons. For example, they may not drive at all, be financially constrained, be satisfied with
their current vehicle portfolio, or choose a used vehicle.
We reduce these concerns by narrowing the definition of the outside good to purchasing
a used vehicle. Conditioning on buying a (new or used) vehicle sharpens the interpretation
of the outside good utility: households that choose the outside good receive the utility
from the new vehicle that is common to their demographic group. Although this definition
does not provide a structural interpretation for the outside good utility, it does make our
inferences about welfare more consistent than the standard method of defining the outside
good. Because our demand model is estimated using several years of data, our substitution
patterns between new and used vehicles are identified by their changing attributes. Because
the average attributes of used vehicles do not change much relative to the market for new
vehicles, changes in new vehicle attributes identify the substitution patterns between new and
used vehicles. For example, during our sample period, tightening new vehicle fuel economy
standards caused new vehicle fuel economy to increase rapidly. These fuel economy changes
help identify substitution patterns for each demographic group.
Calculation of Valuation Ratios
The valuation ratios in Table 4 are the ratio of the WTP for a 1-percent fuel economy
increase to the present discounted value of the resulting fuel savings, which equal the
difference in the present discounted value of fuel costs with and without that increase.
We begin by calculating the present discounted value of the fuel costs without the increase,
which is given by PDVgjt =
Pt+T
τ=t
πjτVgτfτ
mjt(1+rg)τ . T is the maximum lifetime of the vehicle, πjτ
is the probability that it is not retired before year τ (which is sometimes referred to as the
”survival probability rate”), Vgτ is the number of miles the vehicle is driven in year τ, fτ is
the real fuel price in year τ, mjt is its fuel economy, and rg is the real discount rate. We
use assumptions on fuel prices, vehicle miles traveled (VMT), scrappage rates, and discount
rates. For fuel prices, we assume that the price in market t equals the real fuel price in all
subsequent years τ. Using household-level data from the 2017 National Household Travel
Survey (NHTS), we estimate unique VMT-by-age schedules separately for cars and light
trucks and each of the 20 demographic groups. Figures A.4 and A.5 display estimated VMT
schedules for a few of the demographic groups.
We estimate unique scrappage rates for cars and light trucks using R. L. Polk vehicle
registration data from 2002 to 2014. The data provide vehicle counts by class, age, and year.
55


===== [PAGE 59] =====

From these data, we compute annual average scrappage rates as the difference in vehicle
counts divided by prior year counts for each vehicle class. The rates are identical to those in
the appendix of Leard et al. (2017).
We use vehicle loan rates in the InMoment survey data to compute average discount
rates by demographic group (Tables A.3 and A.4). The tables show that the loan rates vary
considerably across groups; low-income households typically face higher rates.
Having computed the present discounted value of fuel costs for each demographic group,
vehicle, and market, we compute the change in fuel costs caused by a 1-percent fuel economy
increase.
We compute the average change for each group using as weights the vehicle
market shares predicted by the demand model for all markets in the estimation sample.
The valuation ratios are then computed as the ratio of the estimated WTP for fuel cost
savings and the average change in fuel costs.
Comparison of Our Cost Estimates with Department of Transportation
Estimates
Having estimated vehicle-specific marginal costs and manufacturer-specific shadow prices
in Section 4.3, we can estimate the elasticity of marginal costs to fuel economy; because of
the normalization of efficiency (Td(j)), it is the same as the elasticity of marginal costs to
efficiency. Following Knittel (2011), we specify a log-log model, and we control for other
vehicle attributes:
lncjt = γlnmjt + Xjtη + ϖj + ςt + µjt.
(A.3)
The coefficient γ is the desired elasticity. We estimate this equation by OLS, expecting a
positive estimate of γ. The vector Xjt includes variables that may be correlated with fuel
economy and also affect marginal costs: the log of weight and interactions of market fixed
effects with body type fixed effects. The equation also includes vehicle fixed effects (ϖj)
to absorb fixed variation within a vehicle.
These fixed effects control for cross-sectional
correlation between fuel economy and unobserved attributes, such as cabin size. The fuel
economy coefficient is identified by variation in marginal costs within a vehicle and over time,
which largely arises from retuning the engine or adding fuel-saving technologies. The market
fixed effects (ςt) control for fixed variation across vehicles in marginal costs.
An alternative to using Equation (A.3) to estimate the relationship between marginal
costs and fuel economy is to use Department of Transportation estimates of the costs of fuel-
56


===== [PAGE 60] =====

saving technologies. As part of the 2016 Technical Assessment Report, the Department of
Transportation uses its technology cost model to estimate the costs of meeting the standards
(EPA et al. 2016). The estimation algorithm begins with a set of vehicles in 2016, recording
the fuel economy, retail price, and set of technologies for each vehicle. The agency uses the
model to simulate compliance with future standards; over time, technologies are added to
the vehicles so that manufactures achieve the specified standards. The model keeps track
of changes over time in fuel economy and technology costs. The agency assumes that the
vehicle’s price increases in proportion to the cost increase. The result of the simulation is a
panel data set of vehicles over time, including fuel economy and retail price.
We obtained these data, and for each vehicle and year t > 2016, we compute the log ratio
of its price in that year to its price in 2016 and compare the log ratio of fuel economy in
that year to fuel economy in 2016. Because the agency assumes that retail prices are a fixed
markup over production costs, regressing the log price ratio on the log fuel economy ratio is
equivalent to regressing the log production cost ratio on the log fuel economy ratio; the fuel
economy coefficient is typically about 0.15, depending on the additional controls we include
and the sample. This estimate is smaller thanthose in Table A.5 using Equation (A.3).
The estimates in Table A.5 and the estimates using Department of Transportation data
have two important differences.
First, the Department of Transportation cost estimates
pertain to technologies that the agency projected would be adopted after 2016, whereas those
in Table A.5 reflect the cost of adding technologies during the sample period (2012–2018).
In principle, the Department of Transportation cost estimates could be higher or lower than
ours. On the one hand, in the Department of Transportation model, the manufacturers
adopt technologies roughly in order of decreasing cost-effectiveness. Consequently, the cost
of a given fuel consumption improvement increases over time, which causes the Department
of Transportation data to yield higher cost estimates than ours. On the other hand, the
Department of Transportation model includes technological change over time, which reduces
the cost of adopting a particular technology after 2018 compared to the cost before 2018.
These two effects oppose one another.
The second difference is that in Table A.5, the
dependent variable is the marginal cost of producing the vehicle, whereas in the Department
of Transportation data, it is the average production cost. For the reasons provided in the
main text, we prefer to use the estimates from Equation (A.3) in the policy simulations.
57


===== [PAGE 61] =====

Computing
Vehicle
Prices
and
Attributes
in
Policy
Counterfactuals
We explain the algorithm for computing the equilibrium vehicle prices, fuel economy, and
shadow price in the baseline and policy counterfactuals. The endogenous variables include
vehicle prices, fuel economy, technology, and shadow price. In equilibrium, the vehicle prices,
fuel economy, and technology choices satisfy Equations (12) through (14) and Equation (6).
Finally, each firm must satisfy the regulatory constraint, Equation (5). Consequently, the
number of unknowns equals the number of equilibrium equations.
For each equilibrium, we choose an initial guess for the prices, fuel economy, technology,
and shadow price. In the baseline scenario, we use the observed price and fuel economy
choices along with the estimated shadow price from Section 4. In the benchmark policy
scenario, the initial guess consists of the observed 2018 vehicle prices and a proportional fuel
economy and technology improvement for each vehicle.
The algorithm proceeds as follows. For each firm, given a shadow price and vehicle prices,
we use Equations (13)and (14) to compute the technology and fuel economy of each vehicle.
Then, conditional on technology and fuel economy, we use Equation (12) to compute the price
of each vehicle. We compare the difference between the firm’s average fuel consumption rate
(the reciprocal of fuel economy) and that required by the standard and adjust the shadow
price accordingly. Given the new shadow price, we recompute technology, fuel economy, and
prices and iterate until convergence. After cycling through each firm in this manner, we
repeat the procedure until the choices of all firms converge.
58


===== [PAGE 62] =====

Appendix Figures
Figure A.1: Fuel Economy for Vehicles Sold in 2011 and Requirements in 2012 and 2022
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Miles per gallon
Footprint (square feet)
Panel A: Cars
2012 fuel economy
2012 requirement
2022 requirement
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Miles  per gallon
Footprint (square feet)
Panel B: Light trucks
2012 fuel economy
2012 requirement
2022 requirement
Notes: Each circle and x represent a unique vehicle sold in 2011. Each blue circle is its fuel economy, in
miles per gallon, plotted against its footprint, in square feet (computed as the product of the wheelbase
and width). Each orange x shows the vehicle’s fuel economy requirement in 2012, and each black x shows
the fuel economy requirement in 2022.
59


===== [PAGE 63] =====

Figure A.2: Comparison of Predicted and Observed Attributes by Demographic Group and
Year
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
45,000
50,000
55,000
60,000
25,000
35,000
45,000
55,000
65,000
Panel A: Transaction price (dollars)
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
Panel B: Fuel cost (dollars) per mile
-2.94
-2.89
-2.84
-2.79
-2.74
-2.94
-2.89
-2.84
-2.79
-2.74
Panel C: Log (horsepower / weight)
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
44
46
48
50
52
54
Panel D: Footprint (square feet)
Notes: For each demographic group, we compute the predicted mean attribute indicated in the
panel title using the vehicle market shares predicted by the model. The figure plots the predicted
mean against the observed sales-weighted mean.
60


===== [PAGE 64] =====

Figure A.3: Comparison of Predicted and Observed 2018 Market Shares by Demographic
Group, Brand, and Class: No-Change vs. Demand Model
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Predicted market share
Observed market share
Panel A: No-change forecast
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Predicted market share
Observed market share
Panel B: Demand model
Notes: Vehicles are aggregated by brand and class. The figure plots the predicted against observed 2018
market share by aggregated vehicle and demographic group. In Panel A, the figure shows the no-change
forecast against observed 2018 market shares. In Panel B, the prediction uses the demand model.
61


===== [PAGE 65] =====

Figure A.4: Estimated Car VMT Schedules for Selected Demographic Groups
62


===== [PAGE 66] =====

Figure A.5: Estimated Light Truck VMT Schedules for Selected Demographic Groups
63


===== [PAGE 67] =====

Appendix Tables
64


===== [PAGE 68] =====

Table A.5: Estimated Elasticity of Marginal Costs to Fuel Economy
Dependent variable is log of marginal costs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Cars
Log fuel economy
0.437
0.439
0.442
0.434
0.400
0.437
(0.042)
(0.042)
(0.042)
(0.044)
(0.046)
(0.042)
Log weight
0.306
0.312
0.304
0.416
0.503
0.306
(0.139)
(0.139)
(0.140)
(0.163)
(0.127)
(0.139)
R-squared
0.956
0.956
0.957
0.959
0.959
0.957
Observations
2,507
2,507
2,507
2,507
2,507
2,507
Panel B: Light trucks
Efficiency
0.345
0.346
0.338
0.332
0.371
0.351
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.040)
(0.042)
(0.039)
Log weight
0.712
0.712
0.711
0.726
0.636
0.742
(0.186)
(0.192)
(0.186)
(0.208)
(0.170)
(0.188)
R-squared
0.896
0.896
0.875
0.902
0.899
0.897
Observations
2,897
2,897
2,897
2,897
2,897
2,897
Year fixed effects
interacted with:
Body type
fixed effects
Body type
and drive
type fixed
effects
Body type
and fuel type
fixed effects
Body type
and make
fixed effects
Body type
and engine
size fixed
effects
Body type
and
cylinders
fixed effects
Notes: Each column and panel show the results of a separate regression. Observations are by vehicle and market. The
dependent variable is the log marginal costs estimated from Equation (12). The table shows coefficient estimates with
the standard error in parentheses, robust to heteroskedasticity.
All regressions include vehicle fixed effects, and the
independent variables are described in the bottom row of the table.
65


===== [PAGE 69] =====

Table A.1: Additional Effects of 2022 Standards: Baseline and Valuation Parameters
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Year of standards
2012
2022
2012
2012
2022
2022
2012
2012
2022
2022
Cost-per-mile
coefficient
Estimated
Estimated
Multiply
by 2
Multiply
by 4
Multiply
by 2
Multiply
by 4
50% under-
valuation
No under-
valuation
50% under-
valuation
No under-
valuation
Panel A: Plug-in market share
Plug-in market share
0.024
0.048
0.017
0.014
0.035
0.026
0.015
0.015
0.033
0.023
Panel B: New and used prices
Average new
vehicle price (2018$)
33,678
35,457
33,749
34,112
35,227
35,191
33,796
34,401
35,248
35,179
Average used vehicle
price (2018$)
-976
1,950
-571
-663
1,185
274
-557
-702
1,134
187
Notes: The table reports additional results for the scenarios reported in Table 6.
66


===== [PAGE 70] =====

Table A.2: Additional Effects of 2022 Standards: Price and Horsepower Coefficients
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Year of standards
2012
2022
2012
2022
Horsepower coefficient
Mean for
all groups
Mean for
all groups
Estimated
Estimated
Price coefficient
Estimated
Estimated
Mean for
all groups
Mean for
all groups
Panel A: Plug-in market share
Plug-in market share
Panel B: New and used prices
Average new vehicle price
(2018$)
33,676
35,592
33,872
35,870
Average used vehicle price
(2018$)
-1059
1,896
-1,282
1,613
Notes: The table reports additional results for the scenarios reported in Table 7.
67


===== [PAGE 71] =====

Table A.3: Vehicle Attributes by Demographic Group—Rural
Income
Age
group
Price
(2015$)
APR
Share
light
truck
Share
hybrid
or
plug-in
Fuel
economy
Horsepower
/
weight
Foot-
print
2016
fuel
economy
requirement
Share
used
< 44k
< 45
26,950
5.33
0.36
0.015
25.9
0.056
54.9
31.2
0.95
(7,881)
(6.0)
(0.011)
(7.4)
(3.5)
44k - 91k
< 45
30,677
4.81
0.52
0.018
23.9
0.059
58.0
29.7
0.92
(9,182)
(6.4)
(0.013)
(9.1)
(3.6)
91k - 123k
< 45
33,270
4.03
0.63
0.018
22.6
0.059
59.6
28.8
0.90
(9,544)
(6.5)
(0.012)
(9.4)
(3.6)
123k - 185k
< 45
36,708
3.54
0.67
0.023
22.1
0.061
60.4
28.4
0.81
(11,132)
(6.6)
(0.012)
(9.2)
(3.5)
> 185k
< 45
43,614
3.16
0.72
0.038
21.3
0.063
61.5
27.9
0.77
(14,693)
(7.4)
(0.014)
(8.7)
(3.3)
< 44k
>= 45
29,465
4.60
0.52
0.018
24.1
0.058
57.9
29.7
0.85
(8,133)
(5.9)
(0.012)
(9.0)
(3.6)
44k - 91k
>= 45
32,091
4.01
0.59
0.028
23.1
0.059
59.3
29.1
0.85
(9,042)
(6.3)
(0.013)
(9.2)
(3.5)
91k - 123k
>= 45
34,637
3.58
0.61
0.038
22.9
0.061
59.7
28.8
0.81
(10,291)
(6.6)
(0.014)
(9.2)
(3.4)
123k - 185k
>= 45
37,039
3.32
0.62
0.040
22.4
0.062
60.1
28.7
0.80
(11,684)
(6.8)
(0.014)
(9.1)
(3.4)
> 185k
>= 45
43,716
2.96
0.64
0.049
21.8
0.065
61.1
28.3
0.73
(15,104)
(7.4)
(0.015)
(8.9)
(3.3)
Notes: The table shows the purchases-weighted mean attribute or market share for each demographic
group, with standard deviations in parentheses. The sample includes all vehicles purchased 2010–2018.
68


===== [PAGE 72] =====

Table A.4: Vehicle Attributes by Demographic Group—Urban
Income
Age
group
Price
(2015
$)
APR
Share
light
truck
Share
hybrid
or
plug-in
Fuel
economy
Horsepower
/
weight
Foot-
print
2016
fuel
economy
requirement
Share
used
< 44k
< 45
26,529
5.07
0.28
0.023
26.9
0.055
53.9
31.8
0.92
(7,567)
(6.0)
(0.011)
(6.7)
(3.3)
44k - 91k
< 45
30,253
4.45
0.42
0.030
25.3
0.058
55.7
30.6
0.90
(9,199)
(6.8)
(0.012)
(7.3)
(3.4)
91k - 123k
< 45
33,071
3.92
0.51
0.040
24.5
0.059
57.0
29.8
0.85
(10,286)
(8.0)
(0.013)
(7.6)
(3.4)
123k - 185k
< 45
36,421
3.39
0.58
0.049
23.8
0.060
58.2
29.2
0.77
(11,626)
(8.8)
(0.013)
(7.9)
(3.4)
> 185k
< 45
43,263
2.97
0.63
0.057
23.1
0.063
58.8
28.7
0.63
(15,183)
(9.7)
(0.014)
(7.1)
(3.3)
< 44k
>= 45
27,965
4.65
0.39
0.028
25.7
0.057
55.4
30.8
0.81
(7,921)
(6.0)
(0.012)
(7.3)
(3.4)
44k - 91k
>= 45
31,371
4.13
0.48
0.040
24.8
0.059
56.7
30.0
0.78
(9,442)
(6.6)
(0.013)
(7.6)
(3.3)
91k - 123k
>= 45
33,739
3.62
0.50
0.050
24.3
0.060
57.1
29.8
0.79
(10,749)
(7.1)
(0.013)
(7.4)
(3.2)
123k - 185k
>= 45
36,539
3.29
0.52
0.061
24.1
0.062
57.4
29.6
0.74
(12,285)
(7.9)
(0.014)
(7.4)
(3.2)
> 185k
>= 45
43,699
2.89
0.55
0.079
23.4
0.064
58.5
29.2
0.62
(15,627)
(9.1)
(0.015)
(7.2)
(3.2)
Notes: The table shows the purchases-weighted mean attribute or market share for each demographic
group, with standard deviations in parentheses. The sample includes all vehicles purchased 2010–2018.
69


===== [PAGE 73] =====

Resources for the Future 
 
 iii 
 
