

===== [PAGE 1] =====

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF “BUY AMERICAN”:
ELECTRIC VEHICLES AND THE INFLATION REDUCTION ACT
Hunt Allcott
Reigner Kane
Maximilian S. Maydanchik
Joseph S. Shapiro
Felix Tintelnot
Working Paper 33032
http://www.nber.org/papers/w33032
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2024, Revised March 2026
We thank Rishab Mohan and Jiawei Yang for exceptional research assistance, and numerous 
colleagues and seminar participants for helpful comments and discussions. We acknowledge use 
of ChatGPT and Refine.ink to proofread. We are grateful to the Becker Friedman Institute at the 
University of Chicago and NSF grants SES-2117158 and SES-2214949 for research support. The 
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Hunt Allcott, Reigner Kane, Maximilian S. Maydanchik, Joseph S. Shapiro, and Felix 
Tintelnot. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted 
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.


===== [PAGE 2] =====

The Effects of “Buy American”: Electric Vehicles and the Inflation Reduction Act
Hunt Allcott, Reigner Kane, Maximilian S. Maydanchik, Joseph S. Shapiro, and Felix Tintelnot 
NBER Working Paper No. 33032
October 2024, Revised March 2026
JEL No. F18, H23, L11, Q58
ABSTRACT
We provide the first ex post microeconomic welfare analysis of the electric vehicle (EV) tax credits 
in the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA). Relative to pre-IRA policy, the credits generated $1.96 in 
domestic benefits per dollar of government spending, with taxpayer cost of $36,500 per additional 
EV. Relative to having no EV credits, they yielded $1.11 in domestic benefits per dollar of 
government spending. A leasing loophole that sidestepped domestic content rules created negative 
domestic benefits. A prominent example of green industrial policy, the credits harmed foreign 
countries by shifting surplus to domestic producers and helped them by decreasing CO  emissions.
Hunt Allcott
Stanford University
and NBER
allcott@stanford.edu
Reigner Kane
University of Chicago
reignerKane@uchicago.edu
Maximilian S. Maydanchik
University of Chicago
mmaydanchik@uchicago.edu
Joseph S. Shapiro
University of California, Berkeley
and NBER
joseph.shapiro@berkeley.edu
Felix Tintelnot
Duke University
Department of Economics
and NBER
felix.tintelnot@gmail.com


===== [PAGE 3] =====

1
Introduction
The Biden Administration billed the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) as the “most ambitious in-
vestment in combating the climate crisis in world history” (White House 2023). In addition to
addressing climate change, policymakers designed the IRA to protect domestic manufacturing and
secure supply chains so as to be politically sustainable across elections. The IRA relied heavily on
uniform tax credits for low-carbon technologies made in the US and allied countries. Tax credits
for electric vehicles (EVs) provided a central component of the IRA. Bistline, Mehrotra, and Wol-
fram (2023) and the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget (2023) projected that the EV
credits would cost $70 to $390 billion over a decade, up to half of the IRA’s projected total cost.
The IRA, however, had a limited lifetime, as the One Big Beautiful Bill Act ended the EV credits
in September 2025. Meanwhile, some progressives have demanded an “IRA 2.0” and Europe is
advancing its own “Industrial Accelerator Act,” which in some ways echoes and responds to the
IRA (Worland 2024; Jensen 2025).
The EV tax credits offer a fascinating case study of combining climate and industrial policy.
To encourage a transition to EVs while reducing China’s dominance of manufacturing and battery
supply chains, the IRA restricts tax credits for purchased EVs to vehicles assembled in North
America that contain a sufficiently large share of battery inputs from the US or allied countries
(excluding China). Equally generous credits to companies for leasing EVs lack these restrictions,
generating a “leasing loophole.” As we discuss, the IRA substantially prioritizes US production,
part of a longstanding “Buy American” federal policy goal that the Biden Administration has
expanded. Yablon (2023) summarizes tensions this created:
Many of the US’s allies like Japan, Canada, and especially the European Union have
not been all-in. They see the Biden administration’s signature accomplishments – such
as the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) – less as long-awaited efforts to finally make good
on promises of climate action and more as a threat to the ability of places like Europe
to attract investment themselves. . . . After decades of pleading with America to finally
take action on issues such as climate, why are our closest partners so annoyed at us now
that we’re actually doing what they asked?
French President Emmanuel Macron, for example, lauded the IRA’s “common objective” in transi-
tioning to green energy and lamented its “super aggressive” stance towards European Union firms
(France 24 2022; Rose and Mason 2022).
This paper’s primary goal is to characterize the market and welfare effects of actual and counter-
factual policy in this context for a social planner that may prioritize domestic over foreign producer
surplus. In the process, we discuss tradeoffs that this prominent example of green industrial policy
creates between trade and the environment and between domestic and foreign interests. The EV
credits combine a non-cooperative, national welfare perspective on producer surplus that encour-
ages profit shifting, together with more cooperative investment in the global public good of CO2
mitigation that benefits the planet.
1


===== [PAGE 4] =====

Our analysis uses a uniquely extensive combination of vehicle market data. We combine propri-
etary transaction-level dealership microdata from Cox Automotive, monthly national new vehicle
registrations by detailed model trim (“submodel”) and lease status from Experian, aggregate supply
conditions data from Edmunds, second choice survey data from Strategic Vision, registration mi-
crodata from two US states (California and Texas), archival web scraping records for Tesla, original
surveys we conducted with over 250 dealerships, administrative air pollution measurements for new
gasoline vehicles (GVs), and administrative credit eligibility from the US Treasury Department,
plus more standard data sources. These records allow a deeper analysis of clean vehicle tax credits
and vehicle trade-environmental policy than has previously been possible.
We begin by describing externalities within EV and within GV submodels. For each submodel,
we calculate CO2 emissions from manufacturing and scrap (“cradle to grave”), CO2 and local air
pollution emissions from driving, externalities from fatal accidents, and fiscal externalities from
explicit or implicit taxes on gasoline and electricity. Our calculations reflect typical assumptions
such as a $241 social cost of carbon (US EPA 2023) and other marginal damages building on Holland
et al. (2016). We also report results when applying a US domestic social cost of carbon (Ricke et
al. 2018). Sensitivity analyses consider long-run marginal emission rates from the electricity grid.
We find comparable heterogeneity within EV submodels as within GV submodels, and substantial
overlap between the EV and GV externality distributions. This finding conflicts with the prevailing
approach of promoting substitution from GVs to EVs (vehicle electrification) as the critical policy
objective to address externalities, without attention to which EVs consumers choose.
To evaluate the EV tax credits’ short-run impacts, we use event study analyses. Under Section
30D of the US tax code, EV buyers with incomes below a threshold could receive $7,500 income
tax credits for buying eligible vehicles. EVs assembled outside of North America lost eligibility in
August 2022. With the implementation of battery sourcing requirements, purchases of many other
vehicles lost eligibility in April 2023. Beginning in January 2023, leased EVs became eligible for
credits, even if the EVs were assembled outside North America and regardless of household income.
Regressions suggest that consumers capture a meaningful share of the credits’ incidence, though we
interpret event study estimates for vehicle purchase prices cautiously since supply chain constraints
potentially affected prices, particularly in mid-2022. Driven by the decreased price of leasing relative
to buying, EV markets shifted significantly toward leasing throughout 2023. Vehicles assembled
outside of North America, which lost eligibility for credits in August 2022 but gained eligibility
when leasing in January 2023, had remarkable shifts to leasing of roughly 50 percentage points.
To study counterfactual scenarios and perform welfare analysis, we use an equilibrium model.
The model has nested logit demand with preference heterogeneity across incomes, an exogenous
choice set, constant marginal costs, and static Nash-Bertrand pricing. This framework is appropri-
ate for predicting effects over a short- to medium-term horizon—long enough to ignore temporary
inventory constraints but short enough to ignore supply chain adjustments, new model entry, or
learning-by-doing. We design the demand system to have flexible substitution patterns on the four
margins most important for evaluating the IRA EV tax credits: substitution from EVs to GVs,
2


===== [PAGE 5] =====

across vehicle classes, between buying and leasing, and across vehicle submodels. We model hetero-
geneous consumer types to match overall patterns in the vehicle market that vary by income. We
calibrate the substitution parameters to match empirical moments from the leasing event studies,
second choice data, and price sensitivity estimates from Grieco, Murry, and Yurukoglu (2024).
We find that repealing the IRA EV credits or replacing them with pre-IRA credits pits trade
versus the environment—these reforms benefit foreign countries by undoing the IRA’s profit shifting
incentives, but harm them by increasing CO2 emissions. Eliminating all EV credits increases foreign
firms’ share of EV registrations by a third (increasing trade) and decreases total EV registrations
by a fifth (harming the environment). Returning to pre-IRA credits has smaller magnitudes but
some similar patterns. The IRA spends $26,500 to $36,500 per incremental EV sold, partly because
72 to 84 percent of credit recipients would have chosen an EV even without the credits (i.e., these
credits are inframarginal and so not additional). From the US planner’s perspective, switching
from no EV credits to the IRA credits has a marginal value of public funds (MVPF) of 1.11 to 1.28.
But replacing pre-IRA EV credits with the IRA EV credits has an MVPF of 1.96 to 2.22, which
is higher partly since pre-IRA policy mostly subsidized foreign vehicles. Interestingly, relative to
pre-IRA policy, the IRA EV credits have a higher MVPF from the US planner’s perspective than
from the global planner’s perspective. This is unusual for a climate policy, since the usual logic of
investing in a global public good like CO2 mitigation is that the global planner benefits more than
the domestic planner. This setting reverses that standard logic because it involves profit shifting,
and the incentive to shift producer surplus across borders outweighs the free rider incentive that
typically discourages greenhouse gas mitigation.
Since the IRA pursued a broad set of objectives, we also calculate the credits’ impact on
employment and manufacturing. We find that repealing the credits decreases US auto assembly
and parts employment by 12,000 to 15,000 jobs, from a baseline of approximately 850,000 workers.
These credits end up spending $169,000 or more per auto industry job created, suggesting that this
policy is not particularly cost-effective solely as an employment program. Repealing the credits
decreases the number of EV batteries assembled domestically by about 250,000.
The long-run
capacity investment capable of producing the increase in US-assembled EVs that we estimate is in
the range of $2.4 to $4.0 billion, in the ballpark of one or possibly two additional large plants.
We also study three other sets of counterfactual changes—to the EV credits’ trade restrictions,
income restrictions, and credit magnitudes. Counterfactuals that equalize trade restrictions between
leases and purchases close most of the leasing loophole, though they preserve the incentive to lease
to avoid income restrictions. The leasing loophole performs poorly, with an MVPF of 0.45 to 0.68
from either the US or global planner’s perspective. The leasing loophole is not a cost-effective way to
relax trade restrictions because our substitution patterns imply that many people who lease foreign
EVs in order to claim IRA incentives through the loophole would have either bought a domestic
EV or an unsubsidized foreign EV instead. Thus, the leasing loophole transfers producer surplus to
foreign firms while increasing EV take-up little. Removing trade restrictions from purchases would
reduce domestic welfare when evaluated under a domestic social cost of carbon, but benefit the
3


===== [PAGE 6] =====

environment and increase US welfare when applying the global social cost of carbon. We generally
find that “Buy American” provisions decrease the credits’ environmental benefits. While broader
debates contest how trade affects the environment, in this setting, trade increases the market share
of a good (EVs) that decreases CO2 emissions.
Counterfactuals that remove the income restrictions have moderate benefits, though they are
regressive. Removing the income restrictions increases the number of US EVs sold, transfers surplus
to domestic producers, decreases CO2 emissions, and obtains an MVPF of 1.46 to 1.79. This reform
also decreases leasing among high income households, since they leased partly to avoid the income
restrictions. We estimate that the income restrictions only drove 15 percent of the aggregate shift
to leasing, with 85 percent due to trade restrictions.
Finally, we consider counterfactuals that change the magnitudes of the EV credits. We calculate
the constrained optimal subsidy that maximizes total surplus in our framework, holding fixed the
list of models eligible for purchase credits. We decompose the constrained optimal subsidy into
three terms: the net distortion (markup minus negative externality); indirect substitution from
non-subsidized vehicles; and profit shifting from foreign to domestic firms. We analyze both a
heterogeneous subsidy that differs by submodel and a uniform subsidy that does not; the two
formulas have similar structure but the uniform version uses demand-response weighted averages
across models.
We find that both the sign and magnitude of these constrained optimal subsidies depend on
political economy considerations. Under a global social cost of carbon, first-best policy would tax
all vehicles, since both EVs and GVs have negative externalities that exceed markups. If political
economy or other forces prevent taxes on GVs, however, the sign of optimal policy reverses—it
becomes optimal to subsidize EVs in order to induce substitution from GVs, which on average
have higher externalities than EVs. Under simplifying assumptions, including non-distortionary
taxation, a uniform EV subsidy of $9,606 maximizes US total surplus. This exceeds the actual
$7,500 subsidy, though not dramatically so. Our decomposition indicates that the profit-shifting
component accounts for 40 percent of this value, so noncooperative motivations matter for subsidy
magnitudes. If taxation generates deadweight loss, the constrained optimal subsidy is much lower.
Differentiated subsidies reflecting submodel-specific externalities obtain about 30 percent higher
welfare effects than uniform subsidies.
Our paper has several important limitations. Because we analyze the short- to medium-run,
we abstract from effects of EV tax credits over the long-term, when automakers might adjust
along these margins. We also ignore US trading partners’ potential retaliatory trade restrictions.
Short- to medium-run analysis is important given ten-year budgeting horizons in the US Congress,
a two- to six-year election cycle, rapid developments in EV policies and investments, potential
future debates about consequences of resuscitating the credits, and of course the IRA EV credits’
three-year lifetime before the One Big Beautiful Bill Act cut them. Additionally, while we measure
externalities carefully, results reflect our externality assumptions. For example, we do not account
for decreased noise externalities from EVs or pollution from the tire wear caused by heavier vehicles,
4


===== [PAGE 7] =====

though we do include other weight-related externalities.
We contribute to a nascent literature studying the IRA and to analyses of prior US tax credits
for clean vehicles by providing the first ex post empirical microeconomic welfare evaluation of the
IRA’s EV tax credits. These credits were designed to be one of the most significant environmental
policies in US history and a leading example of US trade and environmental policy. This literature
includes policy overviews (Bown 2023; Buckberg 2023), reduced-form and structural evaluations of
previous state and federal credits (Chandra, Gulati, and Kandlikar 2010; Sallee 2011; Gallagher
and Muehlegger 2011; Jenn, Azevedo, and Ferreira 2013; Jenn, Springel, and Gopal 2018; Clinton
and Steinberg 2019; Sheldon and Dua 2019; Xing, Leard, and Li 2021; Muehlegger and Rapson
2022; Lohawala 2023), and ex ante evaluations of the IRA credits (Bistline, Mehrotra, and Wolfram
2023; Cole et al. 2023; Slowik et al. 2023; Hahn et al. 2024). Four working papers model long-run
benefits: Linn (2022) models US EV credits in a model with endogenous entry of new vehicles, Head
et al. (2026) model reallocation of EV supply chains in response to the IRA, and Barwick, Kwon,
and Li (2024) and Barwick et al. (2025) focus on the effects of Chinese EV tax credits in models of
endogenous attributes or learning-by-doing. Cox and Acosta (2023) and Bombardini et al. (2024)
study general costs of Buy American provisions in federal procurement. Our estimate of subsidy
additionality echoes recent estimates of environmental policy additionality in disparate settings
(Arkolakis and Walsh 2023; Aspelund and Russo 2024; Chen, Ryan, and Xu 2024). More broadly,
our timely retrospective analysis, not long after the IRA’s passage and soon after its effective repeal,
somewhat echoes timely retrospective analysis of Trump tariffs and COVID lockdowns (Fajgelbaum
et al. 2020; Flaaen, Horta¸csu, and Tintelnot 2020; Chetty et al. 2024; Gopinath and Neiman 2026).
We also provide the first theoretical and empirical analysis of profit shifting and the envi-
ronment. We describe optimal domestic subsidies or taxes for differentiated, traded products in
concentrated industries, then empirically calculate these subsidies and decompose them into net
distortions, indirect substitution, and profit shifting. We also distinguish the role of profit shift-
ing in welfare analysis of the actual IRA EV credits and contrast welfare consequences from the
perspective of global versus national planners, for foreign and domestic producer surplus versus
environmental externalities, and for local versus global externalities. Unilateral trade policy in
imperfectly competitive markets can transfer surplus from foreign to domestic firms (Brander and
Spencer 1981; Brander and Spencer 1984; Venables 1985; Bagwell and Staiger 2012). Quantitative
models of trade and the environment typically assume perfect competition (Costinot, Donaldson,
and Smith 2016; Larch and Wanner 2017; Shapiro 2021; Kortum and Weisbach 2021; Caliendo et
al. 2024); trade-environment models with monopolistic competition do not directly analyze profit
shifting (Nordhaus 2015; Shapiro and Walker 2018; Farrokhi and Lashkaripour 2025), though
Levaggi and Panteghini (2023) provide results in a simple model of multinationals.
Overviews
of the trade-environment literature have little discussion of profit shifting (Copeland and Taylor
2003; Cherniwchan, Copeland, and Taylor 2017; Copeland, Shapiro, and Taylor 2022; Balboni and
Shapiro 2024; Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg 2024). Optimal environmental taxation in concentrated
industries differs from the Pigouvian benchmark due to market power (Buchanan 1969). A few
5


===== [PAGE 8] =====

studies analyze specific tradable industries (Fowlie, Reguant, and Ryan 2016; Ganapati, Shapiro,
and Walker 2020; Hsiao 2024), without focus on profit shifting from foreign to home. Profit shifting
may especially matter for trade-environment issues because polluting industries have high levels of
trade exposure plus returns to scale, shipping costs, capital intensity, and other drivers of concen-
tration (Copeland, Shapiro, and Taylor 2022; Shapiro 2024). Our analysis of the IRA’s pairing of
trade protection with clean subsidies connects to a broader literature emphasizing that environ-
mental policy evaluation can usefully account for both efficiency and political economy (Zeckhauser
1981; Goulder 2020).
Finally, we contribute to the broader literature on auto market environmental regulation (Bento
et al. 2009; Fowlie, Knittel, and Wolfram 2012; Jacobsen 2013; Jacobsen and Benthem 2015; Knittel
and Sandler 2018). Diamond (1973) discusses the theory of homogeneous corrective taxes for het-
erogeneous externalities. Knittel and Sandler (2018), Jacobsen et al. (2020), Jacobsen et al. (2023),
and others estimate welfare losses from imperfectly pricing heterogeneous externalities from pri-
marily GVs. Holland et al. (2016; 2019; 2020; 2024) measure differences in EV externalities across
space due to different fuels used in the electric grid. Building on their work, we incorporate mar-
ket power distortions, international profit shifting, distortionary taxation, and fatal car accidents,
and we analyze the social planner’s problems from both global and national perspectives. These
elements prove important, as distortions from market power and international profit shifting consti-
tute a substantial portion of the constrained optimal subsidies we calculate. Our equilibrium model
reflects common features of and expands on Goldberg (1995), Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1999),
Goldberg and Verboven (2001), Miravete, Mor´al, and Thurk (2018) and other work studying trade
policy in oligopolistic vehicle markets by analyzing buy-lease substitution and constrained optimal
subsidies. Little research compares lease versus purchase decisions, which matter since leasing ac-
counts for a fourth of new US vehicle registrations and impacts financing markets. Our detailed
dealership data and policy-induced variation in lease versus purchase prices make this an excellent
setting to compare lease and purchase decisions.
Section 2 presents the policy background, Section 3 describes the data, Section 4 covers no-
table descriptive facts, Section 5 discusses the event studies, Section 6 introduces the structural
model and welfare framework, Section 7 presents results using the structural model and analyzes
counterfactuals, and Section 8 concludes.
2
Policy Background
2.1
Electric Vehicle Markets
An electric vehicle includes any vehicle with an electric motor and a plug. This covers plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles (PHEVs), which have both an electric motor and a gasoline engine, and battery
electric vehicles (BEVs), which lack a gasoline engine. Gasoline vehicles include any vehicles with
a gasoline engine and no plug, including traditional (non-plug-in) hybrids. We exclude fuel cell
vehicles since they accounted for only 0.02 percent of new vehicle sales in 2022–2023.
6


===== [PAGE 9] =====

EVs represented 18 percent of global new light-duty vehicle sales in 2023, up from 2 percent
in 2018 (IEA 2024). In 2023, about 60 percent of global new EV sales were in China, Chinese
carmakers made half of all EVs sold worldwide, and China was the world’s largest EV exporter
(IEA 2024). China also dominates the supply chains for battery minerals and components (Leruth
et al. 2022).
The Biden Administration responded to China’s dominance in global EV markets by empha-
sizing domestic manufacturing, industrial policy, and secure supply chains. For example, Biden
National Economic Council director Brian Deese said that “[we envision] a twenty-first-century
American industrial strategy—a strategy to strengthen our supply chains [and] rebuild our in-
dustrial base” (Deese 2021). Similarly, Biden National Security Adviser Jake Sullivan said that
“clean-energy supply chains are at risk of being weaponized in the same way as oil in the 1970s,
or natural gas in Europe in 2022. So through the investments in the Inflation Reduction Act and
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, we’re taking action” (Sullivan 2023). In explaining his pivotal vote
for the IRA, Senator Joe Manchin (2024) wrote, “the increased risk of geopolitical uncertainty de-
mands that we turn our focus to increasing US energy production and bringing good paying energy
and manufacturing jobs back to America.”
Our setting has some information about the valuation of climate damages. In regulatory analysis
the US government used a global social cost of carbon (SCC) (US EPA 2023).1
2.2
Clean Vehicle Credits
Clean Vehicle Credits are non-refundable income tax credits of up to $7,500 for buying new plug-in
EVs or fuel cell vehicles under 14,000 pounds. The Energy Improvement and Extension Act of
2008 first established EV tax credits under Internal Revenue Code Section 30D. The 2009 Ameri-
can Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) limited full eligibility to the first 200,000 EVs each
manufacturer sold, thereafter credit amounts phased down to zero over the next four quarters.
Tesla and General Motors (GM) exceeded the 200,000 limit and lost eligibility in 2018 and 2019.
Toyota, Ford, BMW, and Stellantis all exceeded 200,000 by mid-2023. Thus, by mid-2023, the
pre-IRA policy would have mostly subsidized purchases from foreign manufacturers, with all major
domestic manufacturers of EVs being ineligible for pre-IRA credits due to reaching the cap.
Both individual and corporate taxpayers could receive the 30D credits. For example, a business
could claim the credit for buying vehicles for its motor pool or for buying a vehicle to lease to an
individual. In January 2024, after our data conclude, buyers became able to claim the credit at
point of sale instead of waiting until they filed their taxes.
The IRA, which became law on August 16, 2022, changed 30D eligibility requirements for both
taxpayers and vehicle models. For taxpayers, the IRA required that individual buyers have Adjusted
Gross Income (AGI) below $300,000 for married couples filing jointly, $225,000 for household heads,
1The SCC represents damages to all regions, years, and pathways due to climate change. The Obama and Biden
Administrations used a global SCC, while the first Trump Administration used a domestic SCC (Aldy et al. 2021)
and the second Trump Administration essentially uses a SCC of zero.
7


===== [PAGE 10] =====

or $150,000 for all other taxpayers, starting January 2023.
Figure 1 illustrates how the IRA changed eligibility of different vehicle models. The columns
reflect dates of eligibility changes and the rows categorize vehicle models that jointly experience
eligibility changes. The shading intensity reflects the amount of the tax credit that the models
qualify for at that time, from empty (no credit) to full shading ($7,500). The first column shows
that Tesla and GM vehicles received no credit pre-IRA, since they had exceeded the 200,000 vehicle
sales limit (GM owns the brands Chevrolet, Cadillac, GMC, and Buick). The remaining columns
reflect the dates of three changes due to the IRA.
The first major change we analyze is that starting August 17, 2022, vehicles had to undergo
final assembly in North America to be eligible for credits. This excluded the European and Asian
models colored red in Figure 1. We call these submodels the Excluded August 2022 group. Second,
starting January 1, 2023, the policy eliminated the 200,000 vehicle sales limit, which re-included the
Tesla and GM vehicles colored in blue; we call these submodels the Included Jan 2023 group. Con-
temporaneously, eligibility began requiring Manufacturer’s Suggested Retail Prices (MSRP) below
$55,000 (for cars) and $80,000 (for SUVs and trucks), which excluded the Lucid Air, Mercedes-Benz
EQS, and Tesla Models S and X.
Third, beginning April 18, 2023, policy added a battery component and minerals requirement
beyond the North American assembly requirement. We refer submodels thereby excluded as the
Excluded/Reduced April 2023 group. This reform split the credit into two parts: $3,750 for sat-
isfying the critical minerals requirement and another $3,750 for satisfying the battery component
requirement. The critical minerals requirement stipulates that at least 40 percent of the battery
minerals must be either (i) extracted or processed in the US or a country with which the US has a
free trade agreement, or (ii) recycled in North America. The battery component requires that at
least 50 percent of the battery components come from North America. The required percentages
increased in 2024 and would have increased further in future years. In 2023, these requirements
reduced or fully eliminated credits for many Ford, Jeep, Rivian, Audi, BMW, and Nissan models,
colored in orange. Because substituting battery suppliers is generally infeasible in the short-run,
our analysis timeframe largely excludes such substitution. Long-run analysis in future research
could usefully shed light on this possible substitution.
Besides amending 30D, the IRA also established a new “Commercial Clean Vehicle Credit”
under Internal Revenue Code Section 45W, effective January 1, 2023. Section 45W also offered
$7,500 credits for new plug-in EVs under 14,000 pounds. All EVs qualified for 45W credits, with
no final assembly, battery content, or buyer income requirements. In late December 2022, the US
Treasury announced that businesses could claim the 45W credit for leasing EVs to individuals.
Analysts refer to this as the “leasing loophole”: individuals who would not qualify for the 30D
credit to purchase a given vehicle, due to either vehicle eligibility restrictions or buyer income,
could instead lease that same vehicle, and the leasing company would qualify for the 45W credit.
The IRA originally specified for the 30D and 45W to sunset after 2032 and did not cap credits
8


===== [PAGE 11] =====

before then.2 The One Big Beautiful Bill Act accelerated the credits’ end to September 31, 2025.3
3
Data
This section describes our main data; Appendix A.1 provides further details, including on other
datasets we use. Our primary dataset is a submodel-by-month panel of registrations and prices from
January 2022 through December 2023 for all vehicles below 10,000 pounds. We define a “submodel”
as a make × model × trim × powertrain (GV, BEV, PHEV) combination. For example, the Nissan
Leaf has five submodels (S, SV, S Plus, SV Plus, and SL Plus). The four Tesla models in our data
(S, X, Y, and 3) have a single trim and powertrain, so each constitute one submodel.
The registrations data come from a nationwide panel of new vehicle registrations by month
and submodel that we acquired from Experian. Purchases and leases are recorded separately. We
measure the lease share as the ratio of leases to total registrations. We include only registrations
for personal use or lease, excluding other sales to businesses. We also exclude heavy-duty vehicles.
Our price data come from a combination of three sources, since none are complete on their own:
lease terms from dealership transaction microdata from Cox Automotive, supplemental lease terms
for Tesla vehicles from the Tesla website and other sources, and purchase prices from registration
microdata from the California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV).
The Cox data include purchase prices and lease terms for 6.8 million new vehicle transactions
in 2022 and 2023, representing 31 percent of national transactions in those years.
Brand-level
coverage varies but mostly ranges from 20 to 50 percent, and state-level coverage ranges from 10
to 30 percent; see Appendix Figure A3. Cox’s data coverage depends on a business relationship
between Cox and the dealerships, so the data lacks new vehicle sales by direct-to-consumer brands
Tesla, Rivian, and Lucid. For leases in the Cox data, we observe lease duration, annual percentage
rates (APR), rebates, and monthly payments.4 We augment the lease terms in the Cox data with
Tesla lease terms for base model configurations by scraping online sources.5
The California DMV data covers all new vehicles registered in the state in 2022 and 2023.
For purchases in the California DMV data, the reported price represents include the full price
excluding sales tax, license fees, or financing costs. For leases, the California DMV data contain
no information on rebates or other contract terms besides the reported price that the lease reflects.
Instead of relying on them, we combine the lease terms in the Cox and Tesla data with the California
purchase prices to compute lease prices that are directly comparable to observed purchase prices
for all vehicles. We have also run our analyses using purchase prices from Cox for observations
2One writer summarized the IRA as “bottomless mimosas brunch special,” since it does not limit the number of
subsidies that households and firms could claim (Yablon 2023).
3We focus on the 2022-2023 period given our data availability. Anticipation of the expiring credits in September
2025 led to substantial EV registrations just before then.
4While our data record lease rebates, we suspect that rebates which are direct from the manufacturer may not be
recorded, and we do not have concrete evidence on the share of rebates which are provided through this channel.
5See Appendix A for a description of these sources. We do not collect lease data for Rivian or Lucid submodels.
Rivian does almost no leasing during this period, while Lucid only enters our sample near the end of the panel.
9


===== [PAGE 12] =====

where they are available (approximately 93 percent of registrations in our cross-section) and found
extremely similar results, as the California and Cox purchase prices have a submodel-by-month
correlation of 0.99.
We construct a lease price variable for each transaction, reflecting the discounted lease payments
plus the residual, i.e., the car’s resale value at the lease term’s end. Index transactions by i, and
let k = k (i) and t = t (i) index the submodel and month for transaction i. Define Ti as the lease
term in months. Define di as the down payment, mi as the monthly payment, pkt as submodel
k’s average purchase price, DT as the percent depreciation over T months, and δt as the discount
factor. We observe Ti, di, mi in the Cox data, and take pkt from the California DMV data. For
depreciation DT , we follow standard industry estimates that a vehicle loses 20 percent of its value
in the first year and 15 percent annually thereafter (Capital One 2024). We construct the discount
factor δt from the interest rate on new vehicle loans in month t from Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis (2024b).6 Let s index the series of monthly payments. The lease price equals
Li = di +
Ti
X
s=1
δs−1
t
mi
|
{z
}
lease payments
+ (1 −DT )pkt
|
{z
}
residual
.
(1)
Equation (1) lets us compare lease prices to purchase prices, as both reflect a price over a vehicle’s
life. It also lets us compare lease prices across different lease terms.7
In the submodel-by-month panel, the purchase price and lease price variables represent the
mean across transactions. We define a relative lease price variable equal to the submodel-by-month
difference between observed purchase price and constructed lease price.
To address compositional effects from this entry, many of our analyses look at changes within
submodels over time. When submodels enter or exit, many have phase-in or phase-out periods
with unusually low monthly registrations. Our analysis sample excludes data from months at the
beginning or end of a submodel’s life, which we define as when monthly registrations fall below
half of the submodel’s sample average. We apply this to both EVs and GVs. Appendix Figure A5
illustrates the phase-in and phase-out periods that we exclude for EVs.8
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the submodel-by-month dataset.
Our data cover
1,165 EV or GV submodels across all months.
The mean submodel-by-month observation has
1,076 registrations, a purchase price of $51,140, a lease price of $48,011, and a lease share of 25
percent.
Appendix Figure A4 shows the full list of EV submodels and the months in which they appear
6This approach abstracts from loan-level variation in interest rates.
7We performed similar analyses using a simpler (though less economically founded) measure, computed as the
undiscounted sums of payments while restricting to 36-month leases, the most common duration in our data. This
removes the dependence on a choice of discount factors and the residual calculation. We find qualitatively similar
results to those which that follow Equation (1), particularly for the response of lease prices to the 45W change in
January 2023, which Figure 4 highlights.
8The resulting regression coefficients, which our model targets in estimation, differ by less than a percent if we do
not filter on phase-in or phase-out.
10


===== [PAGE 13] =====

in our data. We have data on a total of 62 EV submodels as of January 2022, and another 108
entered the market between January 2022 and December 2023.9
In addition to the submodel-by-month panel, we use several other types of data.
First, to
measure supply chain constraints, we use monthly “days-to-turn” from Edmunds (2024), i.e., the
mean duration that vehicles sold in that month were available in the dealership’s inventory before
being sold. The Edmunds data exclude Tesla, so we collect delivery wait times originally reported
on the Tesla website (Tesla 2023; Pritchard 2023; The Internet Archive 2023).
Second, in summer 2023, we surveyed dealerships to determine EV market wait times, prices,
and other market conditions. Research assistants collected data on the earliest date they could
drive home popular EV models. This survey obtained 681 data points from 258 dealerships in
each of eight metro areas and 20 brands, excluding Tesla and Rivian.
These interviews guide
our discussions of evolving supply chain conditions throughout 2022-2023 and lead the equilibrium
model to focus on summer 2023 as a baseline. Appendix A.3 describes the survey in detail.
Third, to identify substitution patterns in our demand model, we use second choice data from the
New Vehicle Experience Survey (NVES), administered by the company Strategic Vision. Strategic
Vision surveys a large sample of US new vehicle buyers soon after their purchase or lease, and has
a response rate of about five percent. Among other questions, the survey asks whether the buyers
considered any vehicles other than the one they purchased or leased, and if so what model. The
survey also asks for their household income. We have 339,560 survey responses from the respondents
who acquired a new vehicle in 2022 and 2023.
Fourth, we use a few data sources to measure how changes in EV markets affect domestic auto
industry employment, EV battery assembly, and EV plant investment. We calculate these effects
by combining our model-implied marginal cost estimates, the US input-output table, and wage
data together with assumptions grounded in prior work of the cost breakdown between parts and
final assembly; Appendix A.4 provides details.
Finally, we use several sources to measure externalities; Appendix A.2 provides details. Our
main analysis assumes that vehicles impose four externalities: CO2 emissions from manufacturing
and scrap, CO2 and local air pollution emissions from driving, fatal accidents, and fiscal externalities
from explicit or implicit taxes on gasoline and electricity. For CO2 emissions from the value chain of
manufacturing plus scrapping vehicles, we use estimates from Argonne National Labs (Kelly et al.
2022), which distinguishes three powertrains (BEV, PHEV, GV). We rescale emissions from the
manufacturing of EV batteries by the size of each submodel’s battery. For CO2 emissions and local
air pollution damages from driving vehicles, we combine estimates of local air pollution damages
and local grid emission intensities from Holland et al. (2024) with US EPA (2024a) exhaust test and
fuel efficiency records. We assume that 63 percent of PHEV miles traveled are on gasoline and 37
percent are on electricity, following Pl¨otz et al. (2020). Motivated by the fact that EVs are capable
9Timing makes it unlikely that the IRA’s passage affected the introduction of new models in 2023, for two reasons.
Model planning typically requires multiple years’ lead time. Additionally, in 2021 and up through August 2022, auto
manufacturers faced substantial uncertainty about the likelihood of the IRA’s passage or the details of EV tax credits
conditional on IRA passage.
11


===== [PAGE 14] =====

of benefiting from future improvements in grid emissions intensity, we conduct a sensitivity analysis
using long-run marginal emissions estimates from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory to
estimate damages from EV charging. which reduces estimated EV environmental damages relative
to our baseline assumptions. For the mortality cost of car accidents due to each submodel’s weight
relative to the lightest vehicle, we use regression estimates from Anderson and Auffhammer (2014)
and apply the US Department of Transportation (2024) $13.2 million value of a statistical life.
For positive fiscal externalities, we use the utility-specific markups on residential electricity above
private marginal cost calculated by Borenstein and Bushnell (2022) for EVs, as well as federal and
state gas taxes for GVs. For all externalities, we assume that vehicles have a useful life of 150,000
miles, following US EPA (2014).10
We inflate all values to July-August 2023 dollars using the
CPI for Urban Consumers (Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 2024a). Our main analysis assumes
that externalities including marginal damages do not change over time in real terms, so we do not
discount externalities from driving later in a vehicle’s life.
We assume a global social cost of carbon of $241 (in July-August 2023 dollars), following US
EPA (2023). The “domestic SCC” uses domestic (instead of global) damages from CO2 emissions,
equal to $28 per ton, computed using the ratio of the US SCC to global SCC from Ricke et al.
(2018) times our CPI-inflated global SCC.
Our use of the domestic versus global SCC values deserves additional discussion. The domestic
SCC describes the damages to a country resulting from an additional ton of CO2. Using the global
SCC for policy design may generate larger environmental benefits than using the domestic SCC,
since cooperative use of the global SCC efficiently addresses cross-border externalities (Barrett
1994; Weitzman 2014; Kotchen 2018).
In other words, since the setting of climate policy is a
repeated game with strategic interactions across countries, the domestic SCC represents a figure
that is likely lower than the optimal carbon tax for a planner focused only on US welfare. In
welfare aggregation and quantification, we use the domestic SCC to report domestic costs of CO2
emissions and the global SCC to report global costs of CO2 emissions. This allows us to decompose
the share of global benefits of CO2 mitigation accruing between the US and foreign countries. We
also separately report how each counterfactual affects quantities of CO2, which can be evaluated
using any SCC of interest. We view this measurement decision as distinct from the normative
decision about whether a country ought to design policy using the domestic or foreign SCC.
4
Descriptive Facts
Several descriptive facts play important roles in developing and interpreting our empirical results.
To address compositional effects from submodel entry and market share changes, many of our
descriptive figures using the submodel-by-month dataset present fixed-weight arithmetic indices.
10Available evidence is limited though supports our assumption that EVs and GVs have a comparable useful
lifetimes. Nguyen-Tien et al. (2024) estimate a survival model of 30 million vehicles registered in Great Britain.
Their preferred specification indicates that the median lifetime of BEVs in years is 1.5 percent below the median
lifetime of GVs, and that the median lifetime miles for BEVs are about 7.5 percent greater than for GVs.
12


===== [PAGE 15] =====

Specifically, for a variable such as prices, we first compute the mean for a group of submodels
in January 2023, weighting submodels by mean monthly sales in months when the submodel was
available (the “fixed-weight”). For each previous or subsequent month, we then recursively add
the sales-weighted mean change for all submodels available in both months to produce the index
(see Appendix A.1). This prevents the series from displaying fluctuations entirely driven by panel
imbalance.
Tesla has dominated the US EV market. Panel (a) of Figure A1 presents registrations
by month, separately for Tesla and other EVs. Tesla represents 53 percent of US EV sales in 2022
and 2023. Thus, Tesla plays an important role in our event study estimates and counterfactuals.
After our sample years, Tesla’s market share fell below 50 percent in 2024 and 2025.
EV prices peaked in mid-2022. Panel (b) of Figure A1 presents fixed-weight indexes of
vehicle prices by month. EV prices increased in early 2022, peaked in mid-2022, and decreased
steadily thereafter. Tesla initiated the price cuts at the end of 2022 and other manufacturers soon
followed. Media reports attribute the price cuts to the improvement of pandemic-related supply
chain bottlenecks plus softening demand partly due to interest rate hikes (Boudette 2023; Cao 2023;
Shepardson and Nair 2023).
Inventory constraints peaked in mid-2022. Figure 2 presents evidence of supply con-
straints related to the price trends. Panel (a) presents the fixed-weight index of days-to-turn for
GVs and EVs, excluding Tesla. The average non-Tesla EV sold in July 2022 had sat at the dealer-
ship for about 20 days, while the mean vehicle sold in July 2023 had been at the dealership for over
50 days. Days-to-turn of 15 to 20 may be near just-in-time sales for a typical car, while days-to-turn
of 50 represents less severe supply chain constraints.11 Panel (b) presents the fixed-weight index of
delivery wait time for Tesla models. The mean Tesla ordered in July 2022 would be delivered in
about 200 days, while, one year later, the mean Tesla ordered in July 2023 would be delivered in
about 25 days. Our dealership survey found that by summer 2023, market share-weighted EV wait
times were below one month for 94 percent of EVs sold via dealerships and 90 percent of EVs were
available immediately. Guided by these patterns, our event study analyses in Section 5 consider the
relevance of supply constraints for the August 2022 change in tax credit eligibility. We interpret
the April 2023 change in eligibility as facing less severe supply chain constraints. Additionally, this
evidence informs the choice to base our equilibrium model in Section 6 around July–August 2023,
when supply chain conditions had eased.
A majority of EV buyers have incomes below the eligibility limit. The IRA’s Section
30D credits required buyers to have incomes below the $300,000 for married couples filing jointly,
$225,000 for household heads, or $150,000 for all other taxpayers. The NVES data show that 57
percent of EV buyers in 2022 and 2023 reported household income below $200,000, and 78 percent
reported household income below $300,000; see Appendix Figure A6. The IRS Statistics of Income
(SOI) data show that 54 percent of taxpayers who claimed 30D credits in 2021 had Adjusted Gross
11For reference, our full data show the average days-to-turn was above 50 for both powertrains all throughout 2019
and 2020, only dipping below this threshold in the supply-constrained period of 2021 and 2022.
13


===== [PAGE 16] =====

Income under $200,000. Our equilibrium model accounts for income eligibility and how income
affects EV demand.
Assembly locations shifted little after the 30D eligibility requirement. Most vehicles
excluded from eligibility did not change their assembly sites in our analysis timeframe.12
This
guides our interpretation and focus of our analysis on the short- to medium-run, which we interpret
as a period of largely fixed international sourcing.
The EV market share was growing but the domestic assembly share was not. Panel
(a) of Figure A2 shows that the EV share of new vehicles rose from 6.9 percent in the first quarter of
2022 to 12 percent in the fourth quarter of 2023. Panel (b) shows that the share of EVs produced
in the US stayed roughly constant at around 70 percent over this same period. Of course, this
graph does not show what would have happened absent the IRA—these trends resulted from the
IRA credits plus ongoing market forces. For example, foreign manufacturers introduced a dispro-
portionate number of new EV submodels from late 2022, likely independently of the IRA, since
submodel introduction involves a several year lead time. Even without the IRA, this introduction
might have decreased the North American assembly share of EVs in the time series.
The EV credits largely represent a “Buy American” policy. Panel (b) of Figure A2
shows that about 90 percent of EVs assembled in North America are US-assembled. The share of
North American-assembled GVs that are US-assembled is much lower, at about two-thirds. While
the Section 30D EV credits required North American assembly, these data show that in practice,
in the short-run, this required US assembly, leading us to interpret this setting as more “Buy
American” than “Buy North American.”
Dealers advertise and respond to EV subsidies. Many dealerships in our survey men-
tioned the EV credits. Many dealerships also undertook advertising campaigns highlighting $7,500
rebates on leases; Appendix Figure A7 provides one example. Several dealers in our survey also
proposed a strategic transaction to evade Section 30D restrictions—first a customer leases the ve-
hicle, then soon afterwards the customer would buy out the lease. This would obtain the $7,500
Section 45W leasing credit for what was effectively a purchase, without facing trade, income or
MSRP restrictions. Discussions of the EV leasing market in 2023 mentioned this “loophole within
a loophole” (Davis 2023; Bernstein 2024). We investigated the statistical prevalence of this strategic
evasion in the Texas registration data, where we are able to track vehicles over time. We estimate
that it exists but is quite rare; see Appendix B.1.
EVs have somewhat lower externalities than GVs. Table 2 summarizes lifetime submodel-
level externality values by powertrain. Using the global SCC, the mean EV imposes about $14,000
in lifetime negative externalities, while the mean GV imposes $19,300 in negative externalities. It
may be surprising that the difference between EVs and GVs is not larger. The table rows show that
12A notable exception is the Volkswagen ID.4, which transitioned assembly from Germany to Volkswagen’s Chat-
tanooga, Tennessee plant, though this shift began before the IRA’s passage. Hyundai, Kia, and Nissan also announced
and begun constructing US facilities for their EVs around this time. Hyundai’s investment in Georgia was announced
before the IRA; Kia’s Georgia facility was announced in mid-2023. Both began production by 2025. Nissan’s an-
nouncement had 2026 as the target date for production, but later postponed to 2028.
14


===== [PAGE 17] =====

while EVs do have $6,600 lower CO2 externalities from driving, they have higher other non-fiscal
externalities—higher CO2 externalities from manufacturing ($1,200), slightly higher local pollu-
tion externalities via the electric grid ($200), and higher accident externalities due to EVs’ greater
weight ($2,200), though this is offset by more positive fiscal externalities ($2,200).
This partially reflects composition within EVs between BEVs and PHEVs. Unlike BEVs, on
average, PHEVs have CO2 externalities only marginally lower than those of GVs. They also have
$3,000 higher accident externalities than GVs, and $1,000 higher accident externalities than BEVs,
due to their greater weight. How much this contributes to the total externality difference with GVs
depends on the chosen SCC. Under the global SCC, PHEVs have similar negative externalities to
GVs under, but PHEVs have higher average externalities under the domestic SCC, which places
less value on their lower CO2 emissions.
Table 2 also shows that environmental externalities from CO2 exceed environmental external-
ities from local air pollution, which also occurs under the domestic SCC. For this reason, while
our analysis measures both sets of externalities, our subsequent discussions of the “environment”
primarily reflect CO2.
We note that EVs and GVs have different makeups across vehicle classes. For example, 40
percent of EVs are large luxury vehicles, compared to 24 percent of GVs.13 EVs, like some other
innovative technologies, entered the market at higher prices and are gradually reaching a broader
customer base. At the same time, short- to medium-run changes to EV subsidy policy may espe-
cially affect market shares for the classes of vehicles already in the market. Thus, our comparisons
of EV and GV externalities reflect differences in these powertrains’ attributes during our period of
analysis. We conjecture that in the long run, EVs may move towards a more similar distribution
across vehicle classes as GVs.
EVs have large heterogeneity in externalities and similar heterogeneity as GVs.
Figure 3 visualizes the substantial variation in externalities across EV submodels, which reflects
their different weights and electricity use per mile. For both EVs and GVs, valued at the global
SCC, most vehicles have externalities of $5,000 to $30,000, while valued at the domestic SCC,
most vehicles have externalities of $0 to $15,000. Dispersion is similar within EVs as within GVs.
For example, the 90th percentile submodel among EVs generates externalities of $22,600 over
its lifetime, while the 10th percentile submodel among EVs generates $10,000 in externalities; the
comparable statistics for GVs are $27,200 and $14,200. We also note one other type of heterogeneity:
the mostly foreign-assembled vehicles that the 30D credits exclude have slightly larger negative
externalities than 30D-eligible submodels ($833 on average), which affects our evaluation of trade
restrictions in Section 6.14
13These statistics use data from the Wards Automotive Yearbook for 2022, which is available at model level, so
these represent the share of models but not registrations (Wards Intelligence 2022). We define large luxury vehicles
using the provided Wards segmentation as any Luxury Sport/Utility or Luxury Cross/Utility vehicle.
14This largely reflects Tesla. Excluding Tesla and comparing only 30D-eligible to ineligible EVs reverses the sign.
Teslas have lower externalities than the average EV both because they are BEVs rather than PHEVs and because the
Tesla Model 3, the most popular EV sedan, is smaller and lighter than the typical EV, many of which are crossovers
or SUVs.
15


===== [PAGE 18] =====

Table 3 shows two measures of the dispersion in externalities across submodels—the coefficient
of variation, which equals the standard deviation divided by the mean; and the interdecile ratio,
which equals the log of the 90th percentile externality divided by the log of the 10th percentile ex-
ternality. This table shows the surprising result that EVs and GVs have broadly similar dispersion
in externalities, driven in part by the variation within EVs across BEVs and PHEVs. Tests fail
to reject that dispersion is equal for the two powertrains. This finding also applies for total exter-
nalities when separately comparing BEVs and PHEVs to GVs, as well as to several components of
externalities individually.
The standard deviation of carbon damages across EV submodels is just under twice the standard
deviation of carbon damages across states, averaging across EV submodels (Holland et al. 2016).
Geographically, the least carbon-intensive region has approximately half the carbon emissions per
kWh of the most carbon-intensive region; across vehicles, the most carbon-intensive submodels
have over three times the carbon damages per mile as the least carbon-intensive submodels.
The finding that EVs and GVs have similar dispersion in externalities matters because many
policies globally move consumers from GVs to EVs (“vehicle electrification”). Such policies largely
ignore whether consumers purchase high- or low-externality EVs. Policies that make consumers
substitute from low-externality GVs to high-externality EVs (e.g., Priuses to Cybertrucks) can
increase externalities. Our results show that EV policies may benefit from encouraging substitution
from high- to low-externality EVs, just as many GV policies encourage substitution from dirty
to clean GVs.
Additionally, policies like the IRA that subsidize some but not all EVs could
inadvertently increase emissions if they subsidize dirty EVs. The counterfactual analysis in Section
7 revisits these ideas.
5
Event Studies Around Credit Eligibility Changes
This section uses event study analyses that exploit variation over time in eligibility for the EV
credits to estimate effects of the EV credits.
5.1
Methodology
Our event study analyses focus on lease shares and to a lesser extent prices. Estimates for reg-
istration quantities were potentially more related to supply conditions and other market trends;
see Appendix C.3. We present two graphical analyses: descriptive trends in the fixed-weight index
and event study estimates (the event studies use actual values, not the index). The event studies
use two-way fixed effects regressions with GVs as controls. In equilibrium, policy changes for any
vehicle can affect all vehicles, so the event study estimates capture changes relative to controls, not
absolute effects against an unaffected control group.
To formalize the methodology, define ykt as the lease share for submodel k in month t. We
index tax credit eligibility groups by e = e (k) and define te as the month when group e’s eligibility
changes. We let s index months in event time (relative to te), and we define Se as the set of months
16


===== [PAGE 19] =====

in event time over the 24-month sample, excluding month s = −1. Let Dk represent an indicator
for whether submodel k experienced an eligibility change.15 We define ϕk and νt as submodel and
month-of-sample fixed effects. We estimate event study graphs using
ykt =
X
e
X
s∈Se
γe
sDk · 1 {t −s = te} + ϕk + νt + εkt.
(2)
We cluster standard errors by submodel to account for correlation across submodels and over
time. As in the descriptive figures, we weight all observations of submodel k by the mean monthly
registrations in the months when this submodel is available. Unweighted results would be sensitive
to idiosyncratic outcomes for low-volume submodels and to the exact definition of a submodel.
We focus on the evolution of outcomes within four groups groups of EVs.
The “Excluded
August 2022” group covers vehicles eligible under pre-IRA policy but ineligible as of August 2022
due to assembly outside of North America,. The “Included January 2023” group covers Tesla and
GM EVs, which lost credit eligibility under pre-IRA policy due to exceeding the 200,000 sales cap
but then became eligible for lease credits and mostly eligible for 30D purchase credits in January
2023.16 The “Excluded/reduced April 2023” group includes vehicles which were initially eligible
for 30D purchase tax credits under the IRA but then lost half or all of the purchase credits due to
battery sourcing requirements. Finally, the “Other EVs” group had no or other eligibility changes
(i.e., they were always eligible, never eligible, or newly excluded in January 2023 due to MSRP
caps). In some cases, such as our analysis of the impact of changes to the 45W lease credit, we
include the vehicles with an eligibility change in April 2023 in the “Other EVs” group.
We considered several alternative specifications. “Doubly robust” specifications where the GV
control group is reweighted to match the EV pre-IRA average price give similar estimates; see
Appendix C.2.
Alternative specifications using only EVs as controls give considerably noisier
estimates that are mostly not statistically distinguishable.17
5.2
Prices and Economic Incidence
This subsection discusses purchase prices around 30D tax credit eligibility changes. These results
provide some evidence on the economic incidence of the credits, with the strong caveat that trends
unrelated to the IRA in the new vehicle (and especially new EV) market over the period we study,
including a serious supply crunch due to computer chip shortages and other supply chain constraints,
affect our price event study analyses. Additionally, the pass-through that our estimates capture
are local to consumers who continue to purchase while many substitute to leasing (see Figure 5).
15When considering purchase prices and registrations, we replace Dk with the absolute value of the change in
purchase credit available to submodel k, divided by $7,500. For example, a vehicle that becomes eligible for the full
$7,500 tax credit has Dk = 1, and a vehicle where eligibility falls from $7,500 to $3,750 has Dk = 0.5. This primarily
affects the vehicles which experienced a partial reduction in credit eligibility in April 2023.
16The upmarket Tesla Models S and X were the two exceptions that did not gain eligibility.
17New difference-in-difference approaches that focus on addressing staggered treatment timing (Roth et al. 2023;
Roth 2024), are less relevant in our setting because equation (2) estimates a separate set of coefficients {γe
s} for each
eligibility group.
17


===== [PAGE 20] =====

Furthermore, ineligibility of some households (Figure A6) and the non-refundability of tax credits
may decrease takeup. In our setting, constant purchase prices around an eligibility change would
correspond with consumers bearing the full economic incidence, up to the complications of market
trends beyond the policy change. This is because, during our analysis period, buyers can later
claim the 30D tax credit on their individual income taxes.
Appendix C.3 presents and discusses results. Overall, the data show modest change in transac-
tion prices when vehicles lose credit eligibility. While this is what would occur if consumer obtained
much of the economic incidence of these credits, the potential relevance of market-wide trends and
constrained supply conditions leads us to discuss those estimates cautiously.
We also study lease prices as a measure of economic incidence on consumers choosing to lease.
Our empirical analyses focus on the relative lease price (i.e., lease price minus purchase price) for
each submodel-by-month observation, to difference out potentially confounding pricing trends.18
Before and after the IRA, Section 30D allowed firms that lease vehicles to claim corporate
income tax credits for leasing eligible vehicles to any buyer. Thus, firms leasing vehicles in the
Excluded August 2022 group could claim credits under 30D through August, 2022, lost eligibility
from August to December, and could again claim credits under 45W beginning January, 2023.
Tesla and GM could not claim tax credits for leasing in 2022 and the several preceding years, but
they could claim credits under 45W (or 30D, for eligible models) starting January 1, 2023. Firms
leasing all other vehicles could always claim tax credits for leasing EVs.
The lease tax credit effectively reduces the seller’s marginal costs for leasing a vehicle relative to
selling it. In a Nash-Bertrand pricing model like Section 6 describes, if leasing and purchasing the
firm’s other vehicles experience approximately proportional cross-price effects, one would expect
that newly eligible firms would reduce the price of leasing relative to purchasing by roughly $7,500,
the amount of the tax credit.
Appendix C.3 presents and discusses event study estimates for relative lease prices. Overall,
relative lease prices declined by $5,000 or more as the leasing loophole made leasing more attractive.
5.3
Lease Shares
Purchase-to-lease substitution is an important facet of the leasing loophole’s effects.
If many
consumers are willing to lease instead of purchase, then the leasing loophole can have large effects.
If few consumers substitute towards leasing, then the leasing loophole will have limited effects.
One might expect an increase in EV lease shares in 2023 for two reasons. First, a price effect—
as the previous subsection discusses, relative lease prices decreased for some EVs in 2023. Second,
a buyer eligibility effect—when the new Section 30D buyer income limits constrained eligibility in
January 2023, the relative price of purchasing 30D-eligible vehicles increased for income-ineligible
buyers.
Panel (a) of Figure 5 presents the fixed-weight indexes of lease shares for the same three groups
18We estimated qualitatively similar and slightly larger effects when these analyses were conducted on lease prices
in levels.
18


===== [PAGE 21] =====

plotted in Figure 4. For the Included Jan 2023 group, the lease share is about 10 percent until
the end of 2023, matching the timing of Tesla’s lease rebates. For both the Excluded August 2022
group and all other EVs, lease shares decreased moderately in 2022 and then increased markedly
in the first half of 2023. Figure A9 provides a complementary descriptive figure, and shows trends
in lease shares for EVs eligible and ineligible for the purchase credit within the NVES data, split
by household income eligibility.
Panel (b) of Figure 5 presents the corresponding event study estimates, where we again define
the “event” as occuring in January 2023. Consistent with Panel (a), we see a 40 to 45 percentage
point lease share increase for the Excluded August 2022 group compared to the GV trend since
December 2022, little change for the Included January 2023 group until the end of 2023, and a 20
to 30 percentage point increase for all other EVs.
These substantial leasing increases blunt the impact of the Section 30D trade and income
restrictions and reflect some deadweight loss, as tax incentives induce leasing by consumers who
would not have otherwise leased. They also guide our equilibrium model, which treats leasing and
purchasing as separate options.
6
Equilibrium Model
6.1
Model Setup
Demand
We assume a demand system with heterogeneous types corresponding to income levels.
Within each type, we describe a continuum of consumers with idiosyncratic preferences according
to a four-level nested logit demand system. The nests capture four margins of substitution that are
relevant for evaluating EV purchase and lease credits: between purchases and leases of the same
submodel, across submodels within a vehicle class, across vehicle classes within a powertrain, and
from EVs to GVs. Incorporating income allows us to model the household income restrictions to
credit eligibility. It also allows us to match other realistic purchasing patterns in the market—
how average vehicle price and the likelihood of acquiring a new vehicle, an EV, and a lease vary
across the income distribution. In addition, recent work has shown that demographic interactions
are important to generate a demand system that is flexible enough to allow for a range of pass-
throughs (Miravete, Seim, and Thurk 2023).
Consumers have quasilinear utility and unit demand, so they select exactly one good plus a
continuous amount of the numeraire. Consumers choose between submodels and transaction types
(purchase or lease).
Consumers can purchase any submodel and can lease most submodels, if
it offers a lease option. We index each submodel-by-transaction type choice by j. Each choice
corresponds to a submodel k(j), class c(j), and gasoline or electric powertrain g(j). We define class
as a combination of vehicle segment (e.g., sedan, SUV, etc.) and powertrain, so an EV sedan is a
different class than a GV sedan.19 There are J total inside goods, plus we include j = 0 to index
19Our data have nine classes with enough registrations to include in estimation. GVs include SUVs, sedans, pickup
trucks, minivans, and coupes/convertibles. EVs include SUVs, sedans, pickup trucks, and minivans. Informed by the
19


===== [PAGE 22] =====

the outside option (e.g., buying a used vehicle).
The market has M consumers, indexed by i.
Consumer i belongs to one of a finite set of
consumer types h(i), with population shares wh. Each consumer selects the choice j that maximizes
their utility. Let yh(i) be the representative income of consumer i, let pj represent the purchase
price or lease price, and let τh(i)j be the available 30D tax credit accounting for income eligibility.
Indirect utility from choice j is given by
Uih(i)j = ξj −αh(i)
 pj −τh(i)j

+ β
′
h(i)Xj + ϵij.
(3)
Here, αh(i) represents the marginal utility of money and βh(i) represents heterogenous preferences
for specific vehicle characteristics in Xj. Common preferences for vehicle and purchase option
attributes are captured by ξj. Finally, ϵij is an idiosyncratic preference distributed type-1 extreme
value, which we discuss below. We normalize Uih(i)0 = ϵi0 for the outside option. Bold indicates
vectors, so ξ is the vector of ξj parameters, and Xj is a vector of binary inside good indicators,
binary EV indicators, and binary lease indicators.
We allow ξj to differ freely between the purchase and lease option of the same submodel.
While the physical vehicle is the same between these choices, contract-specific differences determine
the attractiveness of leasing relative to purchasing. Manufacturers push specific lease incentives,
calculate residual values, decide whether to allow lease buyouts, and provide financing terms that
vary by submodel. Consumers may therefore perceive the relative value of leasing differently across
submodels.
We parameterize heterogeneous preferences across types by
β
′
h(i)Xj = (β0 × 1j{Inside good} + βEV × 1j{EV} + βLease × 1j{Lease}) × yh(i).
We parameterize price sensitivity across types by
αh(i) = exp
 α0 + αyyh(i)

,
which maintains the property that demand is downward-sloping. Here, αy < 0 would imply that
low-income households are more price elastic.
We assume a nested logit error structure for ϵij. Appendix Figure A15 shows the nesting struc-
ture. The nested logit model differs from a standard multinomial logit by allowing the idiosyncratic
error to be correlated across vehicles that share a nest. Specifically, we define three sets of ran-
dom coefficients
n
ζk
ik(j), ζc
ic(j), ζg
ig(j)
o
representing idiosyncratic preferences common to all choices
within a group. For example, ζg
i,GV represents a random coefficient common to all choices within
GVs.
This commonality generates correlation in preferences across choices.
Three parameters
patterns in the second choice surveys, we combine hatchback vehicles with sedans and crossover vehicles with SUVs.
The options for second choices available to survey respondents partially aggregate across trims, and in rare instances
aggregate the EV version of a vehicle with its GV counterpart; we treat these as a GV second choice. Minivans are
the primary example of this, since no EV-only second choice is present in the survey. Since EV minivans have a tiny
market presence and we weight by first choice shares, this minimally affects our estimates.
20


===== [PAGE 23] =====


σk, σc, σg	
∈[0, 1) capture the dispersion of these sets of random coefficients.20 Then ϵij takes a
standard nested logit form:
ϵij = ζg
ig(j) + (1 −σg) ζc
ic(j) + (1 −σg) (1 −σc) ζk
ik(j) + (1 −σg) (1 −σc)

1 −σk
˜ϵij,
(4)
where ˜ϵij is i.i.d. type-1 extreme value, uncorrelated across j. To be consistent with random utility
maximization, we require 1 > σk ≥σc ≥σg ≥0 (McFadden 1978). If σk = σc = σg = 0, this
reduces to standard logit. As the dispersion parameters approach 1, the within-nest preference
correlation increases, making consumers more likely to select alternatives that share a nest.
Concretely, consider a consumer whose first choice is purchasing an EV sedan submodel. A
larger σk implies more probable substitution to a lease of the same submodel than to a different
submodel, a larger σc implies more probable substitution to another vehicle of the same class than
to a different class, and a larger σg implies more probable substitution to another EV than to a
GV or to the outside option.
The market share for any choice among each type, sh
j , and the aggregate market demand
summing over types, qj, is given by
sh
j =
Z
1

Uihj ≥
max
k=0,...,J Uihk

dF(ϵi)
qj = M
X
h
whsh
j .
(5)
We provide specific functional forms under the nested logit assumption in Appendix D.1. The
substitution between any two choices j and r can be compactly expressed in terms of conditional
choice shares within nests for each type. Writing the market share in equation (5) as the product
of conditional shares via sh
j = sh
j|k(j)sh
k(j)|c(j)sh
c(j)|g(j)sh
g(j) (where, for example, sh
c(j)|g(j) represents
the conditional market share of choice j’s class within its powertrain g(j) among consumers of type
h) delivers
∂qj
∂pr
= M
X
h
whαhsh
j
"
sh
r +

1
1 −σg −1

sh
r|g(j)1 {g(j) = g(r)}
+

1
1 −σc −
1
1 −σg

sh
r|c(j)1 {c(j) = c(r)}
+

1
1 −σk −
1
1 −σc

sh
r|k(j)1 {k(j) = k(r)}
−

1
1 −σk

1 {j = r}
#
(6)
20Cardell (1997) and Galichon (2022) study this formulation of the nested logit model. Galichon (2022) derives the
exact structure of the correlation across choices using the representation in equation (4). In our setup, for any two
choices j and r, Cor(εij, εir) = 1 −

(1 −σg)δg(j),g(r)(1 −σc)δc(j),k(r)(1 −σk)δk(j),k(r)2, where δa,b is the Kronecker
delta.
21


===== [PAGE 24] =====

Equation (6) shows how, when 1 > σk ≥σc ≥σg ≥0, we see increasing substitutability between
two different choices (j ̸= r) that share a nest, since each term in the expression will be positive
and there are more indicator terms as products share more nests . By contrast, the own-price
substitution (j = r) will be negative due to the final subtracted term.
Supply
Auto manufacturing firms indexed by f each offer submodel-by-transaction type choices
among their portfolio Jf. Firms set their prices to maximize surplus in static Nash-Bertrand com-
petition.21 The terms p and τ represent the vectors of prices and 30D credits faced by consumers
for all choices, cj is marginal cost, and κj represents the 45W credit available to firms for leasing
choice j. In practice, cj could be interpreted as marginal opportunity cost, which could include
both physical production costs and cost reductions due to the dynamic benefits from learning-by-
doing as in Barwick et al. (2025). The function qj
 p; p−j, τ

represents choice j’s total quantity
demanded from equation (5) as a function of its price, given the price of all other products in the
market and demand subsidies available. Firm f then solves the following maximization problem
for all products in its portfolio:
max
{pj}j∈Jf
X
j∈Jf
(pj −cj + κj) × qj
 pj; p−j, τ

,
(7)
where (pj −cj + κj) is the 45W credit-inclusive markup over marginal costs, which we will denote
using µj when computing producer surplus.22 Firm f’s first-order condition with respect to an
arbitrary choice j in Jf is
[pj] :
qj +
X
r∈Jf
(pr −cr + κr) ∂qr
∂pj
= 0.
(8)
We define firms f at the level of the parent company, such as Stellantis (which owns Chrysler,
Dodge, Jeep, and other brands). Our data have 17 firms.
Equilibrium
The equilibrium describes a set of prices p such that any firm f facing demand for
their products as in equation (5) and taking prices of competitor firms as given has, for each j in
its portfolio, a best response pj that satisfies equation (8) in the pricing game and is consistent
21We assume no interactions with the federal fuel economy and greenhouse gas emission standards. Automakers
had many banked of compliance credits in 2023, though many transacted over the period we study (US EPA 2024b).
The standards did not bind for that year at the industry level, but were designed to generally bind over a longer
future period. Our assumption would exactly reflect reality if a future administration set non-binding standards or
set future stringency to equate marginal benefits and marginal costs of future compliance. This occurred under the
second Trump administration, which substantially weakened these standards (Domonoske 2025). Our setting would
violate this assumption if more EV sales in 2023 make it easier to comply with the standards in future years. This
would generate a “waterbed effect,” through which EV tax credits would have smaller net effects on CO2 emissions.
22For robustness, we consider an alternative conduct assumption where all EV manufacturers except Tesla price
EVs at zero marginal cost (i.e., no markups). This “penetration pricing” check reflects a scenario where manufacturers
seek to maximize production subject to nonnegative profits, which can increase dynamic benefits in a setting with
learning-by-doing through production. One implication is that EV credits to these firms are fully passed through
to consumers and the primary market inefficiency comes from externalities, rather than market power for most EVs
(Tesla and GVs do retain market power). Appendix Table A6 presents those results.
22


===== [PAGE 25] =====

with the price vector p. Nocke and Schutz (2018) show that a unique price equilibrium under
Nash-Bertrand competition exists with nested logit demand and multi-product firms whenever
each firm supplies products only in one of the nests. Garrido (2024) extends this uniqueness result
to a nested logit with deeper nesting structures, but demonstrates that it no longer holds under
consumer heterogeneity—observed or otherwise. This is the same difficulty in establishing unique
pricing equilibria that consumer heterogeneity introduces into mixed logit demand models with
multi-product firms, even absent any nesting. On this front, imposing downward-sloping demand,
as we do, is often helpful. Still, our baseline model does not guarantee these sufficient conditions
for uniqueness along both dimensions: the ownership structure on the supply side and consumer
heterogeneity on the demand side. However, in practice we do not encounter multiple equilibria in
estimation.
Still, for robustness, we consider two related specifications.
The first is a version with no
consumer heterogeneity in which each firm separately prices its products within each powertrain-
class nest, not taking into account within-firm cannibalization across powertrain-class nests. This
model of demand satisfies Nocke and Schutz (2018)’s conditions for uniqueness. This specification
has less variation in markups across products within a firm and lower markups overall. The share-
weighted correlation in markups has reasonable magnitude, at 73 percent. The second specification
replaces preserves consumer heterogeneity but replaces the nine powertrain-by-class nests with four
powertrain-by-foreign/domestic brand nests. This version has a substantially different ownership
structure across nests than the baseline model, but the share-weighted correlation in markups is
98 percent. This gives one additional confidence that the baseline model is not encountering a
particular, distant local equilibrium and that our results are not overly sensitive to the definition
of product ownership.
6.2
Estimation Procedure, Calibration, and Results
This subsection describes our estimation procedures, targeted moments, and evaluation of model
fit. Appendix D.2 provides additional details.
We estimate the following sets of parameters: the J-vector of non-price attributes ξ; the two
price response parameters α = {α0, αy}, three preference parameters β = {β0, βEV , βLease}, and
three nested logit parameters σ =

σk, σc, σg	
; and the J-vector of marginal costs c. First, for
given values of {α, β, σ} and observed market quantities qj, we back out the unique vector of
non-price attributes ξ using the Berry (1994) contraction mapping. Second, given values of ξ,
we use minimum distance gradient-based optimization to find new values of {α, β, σ} that match
an exact-identified set of moments described below. We iterate the first and second steps until
convergence. Third, we construct the demand slopes ∂qj
∂pr implied by the demand parameters from
the first and second steps, and back out the marginal costs c implied by the system of first-order
conditions from equation (8).
Before estimating parameters, we make the following assumptions. Our baseline scenario con-
siders the market as of July and August 2023, with the choice set including submodels available
23


===== [PAGE 26] =====

and IRA credit eligibility as in those months. This follows our dealership survey and statistical ev-
idence suggesting that supply chain constraints were relaxing by this period. July 2023 marked the
first month that average days-to-turn for EVs exceeded 50 since before 2021, which suggests that
including months prior to July would risk capturing the impact of tight supply chains. Moreover,
including months after August would introduce subsequent changes to vehicle eligibility (e.g., the
Tesla Model X experienced a price cut which brought it below the 30D MSRP cap) and in the set
of vehicles available due to new submodel introductions.
We set market quantities qj equal to six times their total for July plus August, representing
annualized values, so we abstract from seasonality in vehicle markets. To model heterogeneous
individuals by income, we define 12 representative households based on the AGI bins provided
in the IRS Statistics of Income for 2023, with population weight wh equal to that bin’s share of
taxpayers and income equal to the average AGI within that bin. We define the 30D tax credit
income eligibility threshold at the $300,000 AGI cap for married couples.23 We assume that each of
the 131 million US households purchases a vehicle every six years as in Co¸sar et al. (2018), giving
a potential market size of M = 21.9 million households per year. This is larger than the annual
number of new vehicle sales to capture that some households consider a new vehicle but ultimately
choose the outside option.
We find {α, β, σ} that match eight empirical moments, summarized in Table 4. We match these
moments jointly, but discuss them in order. First, we match the market share-weighted model-level
own-price demand elasticity of -5.36 that Grieco, Murry, and Yurukoglu (2024) estimate for their
most recent reported year. We match their elasticity instead of developing price instruments in
our own data because their instruments (based on exchange rate shocks) are plausible but require
many years of data. Their estimate also reflects an annual own-price demand elasticity with flexible
supply, whereas the quantity variation in our complete monthly time-series data partly reflects
supply constraints. Effectively, this moment targets findings from frontier research rather than re-
inventing the wheel for our case. Appendix Table A6 considers sensitivity to an alternative value
of -4.
Second, we match the semi-elasticity of lease shares estimated in Section 5—for the Excluded
August 2022 group between October–December 2022 and July–August 2023, we estimate that lease
prices decreased by $5,677 relative to purchase prices, and lease shares increased by 39 percentage
points (Appendix Table A2). We simulate an equivalent reduction in lease prices to match the
increase in lease shares for that group of models. Intuitively, these first two moments are jointly
informative about α0 and σk. The own-price demand elasticity defines how many consumers sub-
stitute away from a choice while the lease share change defines how many turn to the immediate
purchase or lease alternative.
23We take two additional steps in modeling income. First, we transform yh(i) into z-scores of log income, estimating
the mean and standard deviation of the log-income distribution using an interval regression on the binned IRS SOI
data. This means we can also interpret ξj as the mean vehicle preference for an average-income household (having
a z-score of zero). Second, to explicitly account for the $300k threshold, we split the provided $200k-$500k bin in
the IRS SOI table into a $200k-$300k bin and a $300k-$500k bin using the interval regression to impute population
weights and average income under the assumption of a log-normal distribution.
24


===== [PAGE 27] =====

Third and fourth, we match two second-choice moments from the NVES data. Among respon-
dents who named a second choice, 53 percent of EV owners report another EV as their second
choice. Additionally, 34 percent of EV owners report another EV within the same class as their
second choice. These two moments are jointly informative about σc and σg, the correlation in
preferences within a class and powertrain.
Finally, we match four moments from the NVES that describe heterogeneity in purchase be-
havior within the vehicle market. For each, we compare households with incomes above $300,000
to households below $300,000. In the survey, we calculate that high-income households buy cars
that are on average $12,995 more expensive (informative of αy), are 1.99 times more likely to buy
any vehicle (informative of β0), are 12.3pp more likely to buy an EV (informative of βEV ), and
are 0.4pp more likely to lease a vehicle (informative of βLease) than households with incomes below
$300,000. Appendix D.2 provides more information on how we calculate these statistics.
Table 5 presents the scalar parameter estimates. Since we have as many moments as parameters
to estimate, we match the targeted moments exactly. We compute associated standard errors using
the delta method; Appendix D.3 provides details. The standard errors are small; for example,
we estimate the average price response parameter as α0 = −0.383 (0.023) and that low-income
households are more price elastic via αy = −0.237 (0.004). Other parameter estimates have similar
levels of precision. To explore the potential importance of modeling uncertainty, we estimate several
alternative specifications—a model with no income heterogeneity, an average own-price elasticity of
-4, an alternative nesting structure with domestic and foreign brands, Nocke-Schutz restrictions on
supply, and a conduct assumption that firms (except Tesla) price their EVs at marginal cost—and
present the results in Appendix Table A6.
Other Evidence of Model Fit
This subsection discusses eight additional types of evidence on model fit. Table 6 compares moments
that the model does not formally target against reference values.24 Along many of these dimensions,
and several more that we discuss below, model fit is good though not perfect. Together, we believe
this evidence suggests that the model realistically captures important aspects of the setting we
study.
First, Table 5 shows that our demand system is consistent with utility maximization. in esti-
mation, we do not impose the requirement that 1 > σk ≥σc ≥σg ≥0, but our main estimates
satisfy this condition with tight standard errors. This does not always occur. For example, when
we estimate versions of the model that move the EV/GV nests from the top level to the sec-
ond level, estimation pushes σg < 0, which rejects that alternative nest ordering.25 This occurs
both when the top nest is vehicle class or domestic/foreign brands. We take this as evidence that
powertrain-related preferences are strong enough to support our nesting assumptions.
24We evaluated these other moments after fully completing model development.
25As these estimates are inconsistent with random utility maximization, we do not report anything further on
them.
25


===== [PAGE 28] =====

Second, Appendix Figure A16 shows that we capture heterogeneity throughout the income
distribution, even though in estimation we only focus on the simple difference between aggregating
households above and below the 30D income-eligibility threshold.
Third, we only target second-choice moments from the EV side of the market, but the GV
second choice shares from the model and the data also align. Our estimated model implies that
95.7 percent of GV owners choose another GV as a second choice, compared to 96.8 percent in
the NVES. Figure 6 shows the aggregated substitution matrix between our nine-by-nine different
powertrain-segment combinations in model and the data. The correlation between the two is 0.91
when weighting cells by first-choice market share. When restricting to buyers whose first- and
second-choice is an EV, the weighted correlation is 0.99. In particular, our model-implied second
choices for those with an EV as their first choice (the lower portion of the left panel) match closely
the patterns in the NVES data: the highest density is for substitution to within-class EVs, and the
off-diagonal pattern is qualitatively quite similar.
As an example of the model’s predictions, we compare second choices between the model and
NVES for two prominent but different EVs. Consider the Chevrolet Bolt EV, a budget subcompact
hatchback. The model predicts that the most popular second choices for the Bolt are the Tesla
Model 3, the Tesla Model Y, and the Chevrolet Bolt EUV. In the NVES data, the Tesla Model 3 is
also the most common second choice, with the Tesla Model Y in fifth, and the Bolt EUV in ninth.
Both the model and the NVES show that sedans are a closer substitute for the Bolt than SUVs
are. Second, consider the Ford Mustang Mach-E, a premium crossover SUV. The model-implied
second choices for the Mustang Mach-E are the Tesla Model Y, the Tesla Model 3 and the Jeep
Wrangler PHEV. Similarly, the NVES reports the Tesla Model Y as the closest second choice, with
the Tesla Model 3 in fifth.26
Fourth, to benchmark the correlation with environmental outcomes, we calculate the average
miles per gallon equivalent (MPGe) for GVs and EVs of second-choice vehicles. In the NVES,
among GV buyers who consider a second choice, the second choice has an MPG of 27.6, compared
to our model-estimated mean MPG of 30.0. The corresponding second choice for EV buyers in
the NVES has mean MPGe of 66.6, compared to our model-estimated mean MPGe of 67.2. While
these statistics suggest good fit, this moment is closely related to choice of powertrain and mean
MPGe within each powertrain.
Fifth, we compare the second choices in the NVES to the model-implied second choices along
US firm ownership and domestic assembly shares. In the NVES, among buyers of vehicles made
by US firms, the second choice share of US firms is 62.2 percent, while the model-implied share is
38.5 percent. Domestic assembly share of second choices, conditional on the domestic assembly of
the first choice, is 57.7 percent in the NVES and 39.3 percent in the model, though this is closely
related to firm ownership. We acknowledge that the fit along these dimensions is imperfect, so
Appendix Table A6 reports results replacing the vehicle class nest in the nested logit structure
26NVES respondents rarely mention the Jeep Wrangler as a second choice for the Mach-E, though the Ford Bronco,
a direct competitor to the Jeep Wrangler, is in seventh as the top non-BEV vehicle.
26


===== [PAGE 29] =====

with a US or foreign firm nest. That demand system is able to replicate these reference values.
Our results are robust to this change.
Sixth, our estimates also imply an aggregate new vehicle demand elasticity of -1.1.
Berry,
Levinsohn, and Pakes (2004), Grieco, Murry, and Yurukoglu (2024) and the empirical evidence in
Allcott et al. (2023) suggest comparable values ranging from -0.9 to -1.3. Our own-price elasticity
of demand for EVs is -2.6, close to the value of -2.8 that Xing, Leard, and Li (2021) estimate.
Seventh, we estimate positive marginal costs for all submodels. We estimate that EVs have
higher average marginal costs than GVs as well as greater dispersion across firms. We reiterate
that our estimates reflect a combination of positive static production costs and negative dynamic
benefits, and our data do not allow us to distinguish between the two. Consequently, to the extent
that there is overlap in the distribution of costs between EVs and GVs, we cannot say whether this
overlap reflects similar static marginal production costs with small returns to learning-by-doing, or
higher EV production costs with large returns to learning-by-doing. In either case, given marginal
costs, we estimate share-weighted mean markups of $10,500 for EVs (20 percent of price) and $8,300
for GVs (19 percent of price). This has similar magnitude to the Grieco, Murry, and Yurukoglu
(2024) estimate that vehicle markups average 22 percent of price in 2018, their most recent year,
though the similarity is not a high bar given that we match their mean price elasticity by design.
The dispersion of implied markups across submodels ranges from $6,700 to $15,500, with the largest
markups for Tesla; Appendix Figure A17 shows the full distribution.
Eighth, we can benchmark our estimated percentage markups to industry reports of gross profit
margins, which measure a firm’s accounting profit after subtracting out the cost of goods sold from
sales revenue. Model-implied markups may differ from accounting profit for many reasons, including
fixed costs of investment, capital depreciation, research and development activity, shadow costs of
plant capacity, dynamic benefits from learning-by-doing, and tax loss harvesting. Still, we estimate
that Tesla’s markup as a share of revenue is 23.0 percent, which is in the range of Tesla’s reported
gross margin of its automotive business in 10-K filing for 2022–2023 (19.4 to 28.5 percent). Similarly,
when ranking firms by their profit margin for EVs, the ordering from the model matches real-world
reporting. At the extremes, the model indicates Tesla as the most profitable and Rivian the least
profitable; in the middle, the model ranks GM’s electric vehicle division as more proIfitable than
Ford’s (Boudette 2024).
6.3
Welfare and Measures of Policy Effectiveness
Social welfare has four components: consumer surplus, producer surplus, government spending, and
externalities. We compute consumer surplus using the Small and Rosen (1981) log-sum formula
adjusted for nested logit demand and aggregating over consumer types, denoted by CS(p, τ). We
compute producer surplus as the sum of 45W credit-inclusive markups, µj.27 Subsidies provided
27While producer markups are endogenous to policy, we assume that the outside option (e.g., used vehicles) is
competitively sold at constant markup. Since the mean indirect utility of the outside option is normalized to zero,
the absolute level of utility cannot be measured. We can, however, report changes in surplus relative to a baseline
scenario.
27


===== [PAGE 30] =====

by the government have a fiscal cost that depends on the marginal cost of raising public funds
(MCPF), η. Externalities arise from the production and use of choice j and consist of carbon
and non-carbon components under an assumed social cost of carbon, ϕj = SCC × ϕCO2
j
+ ϕOther
j
.
Appendix A.2 provides details of how we calculate these externalities.28
Global welfare under a given subsidy policy (τ, κ) equals
W (τ, κ) =
CS (p, τ)
|
{z
}
consumer surplus
+
X
j∈J
qjµj
|
{z
}
producer surplus
−η
X
j∈J
qj (τj + κj)
|
{z
}
government spending
−
X
j∈J
qjϕj
|
{z
}
negative externalities
(9)
Equation (9) takes the perspective of a global planner who internalizes the effects of a policy on
all firms and uses a global social cost of carbon. Section 7 considers alternatives, denoted W US,
that describe how a domestic planner may evaluate a policy. For example, the US social planner
may place no weight on foreign producer surplus, which shows up as a restricted set JUS ⊂J in
the value of producer surplus. Or, the domestic planner may assign different values to ϕj, which
we denote ϕUS
j
, such as assuming a domestic social cost of carbon or placing additional value on
domestic job creation within ϕOther
j
:
W US (τ, κ) = CS (p, τ) +
X
j∈JUS
qjµj
|
{z
}
domestic profits
−η
X
j∈J
qj (τj + κj) −
X
j∈J
qjϕUS
j
|
{z
}
domestic externalities
(10)
We use these welfare measures to highlight the tradeoffs in green industrial policy between
trade, the environment, and industrial policy goals like job creation. We separate producer surplus
into components from US- versus foreign-owned firms. For calculating these statistics, we define
products owned by “US firms” (JUS) as Tesla, Rivian, Lucid, Ford, GM, and the former Chrysler
Group brands (Chrysler, Dodge, Jeep, and Ram). We define all others as “foreign firms.”29
In addition to welfare, our counterfactual analyses discuss two other aggregate metrics for policy
evaluation: the welfare cost per ton of CO2 abated and the marginal value of public funds (MVPF,
28Conceptually, for each choice, we want to compute uninternalized externalities, not directly affected by the policy
changes we consider, over the life of those vehicles in the locations where they are operated. Changes in new vehicle
prices induce substitution to used vehicles, taxis, ride sharing, public transportation, reduced overall mobility, and
other options. We assume that the bulk of this effect involves driving used vehicles more and delaying their scrap.
Since most used vehicles today are GVs, we assume that the outside option has the same externality as the average
GV, except with no manufacturing CO2 emissions.
29One could imagine potential modeling alternatives, such as separating producer surplus by whether vehicles are
assembled in the US or abroad, or whether the supply chain primarily reflects value chain components from US
allies versus other countries, or assuming a policymaker preference function which assigns positive weight to interest
groups like incomes of US auto workers, analogous to Grossman and Helpman (1994). We analyze domestic versus
foreign firms’ producer surplus since this partition is fairly standard in the multinationals literature (Tintelnot 2017;
Arkolakis et al. 2018) and is symmetric to the domestic versus foreign components of the social cost of carbon. We
discuss effects on domestic employment, assembly, and batteries, which provides an alternative to distinguishing
between foreign and domestic vehicles only by ownership.
28


===== [PAGE 31] =====

see Hendren and Sprung-Keyser (2020) and Hahn et al. (2024)). We define these as
Cost
tonCO2
= ∆CS + ∆PS −∆non-CO2 negative externalities −∆G
∆CO2
(11)
MVPF = ∆CS + ∆PS −∆negative externalities
∆G
where CS and PS are consumer and producer surplus and G is government spending. The cost
per ton abated helps to compare against alternative estimates of the social cost of carbon, though
has limitations (Hahn et al. 2024). For example, it is negative for policies which reduce carbon
emissions but are welfare-positive even when not considering carbon damages. To focus on the
value of subsidy expenditures, our calculation of the MVPF includes only EV tax credit spending
in the denominator; we interpret the gas tax as a (fiscal) externality.
For counterfactuals that decrease government spending, the MVPF may be interpreted as evalu-
ating the higher-spending alternative. For example, when comparing the IRA to its repeal, a higher
MVPF means that the additional spending on the IRA is more valuable. The MVPF can help com-
pare against alternative estimates of the marginal cost of public funds (MCPF). The MCPF is 1 in
our model with lump-sum taxes, but it exceeds 1 in a more realistic case where governments raise
revenue through distortionary taxes.
6.4
Constrained Optimal Policy
This subsection discusses our methodology for estimating constrained optimal uniform and differ-
entiated EV subsidies, subject to coverage restrictions.
Theory
Our setting has two potential market failures: over-consumption due to negative exter-
nalities ϕj and under-consumption due to markups µj. We refer to the difference between price and
social marginal cost, µj −ϕj, as the “price distortion.” Below we present results when the MCPF
is 1, but Appendix E shows corresponding derivations under a general MCPF, when financing
subsidies generates additional distortions. We also solve for the constrained optimal consumption
subsidy τ that applies equally to purchases and leases; this counterfactual imposes no income eli-
gibility restrictions and does not separately consider the producer subsidy κ. In a standard model
where statutory and economic incidence are independent, τ and κ are perfect substitutes and
infinite combinations of the two yield the same welfare (Weyl and Fabinger 2013).
Appendix E.1 derives the standard result that first-best policy for a global planner (maximizing
W) implements a vector of choice-specific Pigouvian subsidies or taxes that exactly offset the price
distortion: τ FB
j
= µj −ϕj.30
Recall that τj < 0 represents a tax.
In practice, the IRA and
analogous subsidies may deviate from optimal policy for several reasons. National policymakers
30When the MCPF exceeds 1, the global planner equates the cost of the transfer to the government, ητ F B
j
, with
the combined distortions in the economy from unpriced externalities and the transfers themselves. An additional
term arises from transfers to inframarginal consumers, each of whom receives a marginal unit of income at a cost of
η to taxpayers.
29


===== [PAGE 32] =====

may maximize domestic welfare, as in W US. Additionally, institutions or political economy may
limit policymakers to subsidizing only EVs or another subset of choices, such as vehicles meeting
30D requirements.
Furthermore, policymakers may choose uniform rather than vehicle-specific
subsidies.
Our expression for the uniform subsidy amount that maximizes US welfare, τ SB,U, requires
additional notation. Let S denote the set of subsidized choices and let \S denote its complement,
including the outside option. Define JFor as the set of choices among foreign-owned firms, each
of which receive producer surplus πj per vehicle.
Appendix E.2 derives the expression for the
vector of constrained optimal differentiated subsidies that applies only to vehicles in S but does
not restrict the subsidy to be equal across vehicles. The uniform subsidy τ SB,U instead restricts
the subsidy to be equal for all choices in S. Here, demand-response weighted averages provide
sufficient information to determine the subsidy level. Define ¯µS ≡(P
j∈S
dqj
dτ µj)/(P
j∈S
dqj
dτ ) as
the demand-response weighted average markup among S and ¯ϕS ≡(P
j∈S
dqj
dτ ϕj)/(P
j∈S
dqj
dτ ) as
the demand-response weighted average externality among S (correspondingly, ¯µ\S and ¯ϕ\S among
unsubsidized goods).31
Proposition 1. At an MCPF of one, constrained optimal uniform subsidies for a fixed subset of
choices, S, are
τ SB,U =
 ¯µS −¯ϕS

|
{z
}
price distortion
−
 ¯µ\S −¯ϕ\S

|
{z
}
indirect substitution
−

X
j∈S
dqj
dτ


−1 
X
j∈JF or
dπj
dτ


|
{z
}
profit shifting
(12)
Proof. Appendix E.3.
When only EVs receive a subsidy, the constrained optimal uniform EV subsidy equals the
difference in demand response-weighted average price distortions between EVs and non-EVs, minus
the marginal surplus shifted to foreign firms per marginal electric vehicle at the optimal subsidy
level. Although equation (12) describes three components, when we empirically implement this
formula, in some cases we aggregate the first two terms so that we report a decomposition into
two components—one representing externalities and markup distortions due to encouraging sales
of EVs in S and shifting sales away from vehicles in \S (the first two terms in the equation); and
the other representing a trade incentive to shift profits away from foreign firms (the third term).
We mention two other points.
We solve for constrained optimal subsidies by treating the
equation as a contraction mapping and re-computing markups, profits, and derivatives in each
iteration of subsidies. Also, in the more general setting with an MCPF above one, there is an
additional term in the decomposition of equation (12) corresponding to tax distortions.
Descriptive Patterns of Price Distortions
The distribution of baseline (negative) price dis-
tortions across EVs and GVs (Figure 7) contributes to the constrained optimal subsidies that the
31Specifically, ¯µ\S ≡(P
j∈\S
dqj
dτ µj)/(P
j∈\S
dqj
dτ ) and ¯ϕ\S ≡(P
j∈\S
dqj
dτ ϕj)/(P
j∈\S
dqj
dτ ).
30


===== [PAGE 33] =====

next section recovers. Figure 7 echoes the histogram of negative externalities in Figure 3, with the
difference being that it includes the model-derived markup to infer social marginal cost.
Figure 7 shows several important properties about the distribution of price distortions. Panel
(a) shows that at a global SCC, negative externalities exceed markups for almost all submodels.
This implies that if policy applied to all vehicles, an EV tax rather than subsidy would be optimal.
Dispersion within powertrains is driven by differences across submodels in fuel economy, weight,
local pollution, and markups. This dispersion implies that vehicle-specific differentiated taxes or
subsidies may outperform uniform EV subsidies. The market share-weighted average distortions are
about $3,400 for EVs and $11,000 for GVs. This implies that a lower tax or higher subsidy for EVs
will have indirect benefits through encouraging substitution from GVs. Furthermore, within EVs,
we note that Section 30D-eligible and Section 30D-ineligible vehicles have average price distortions
of $3,000 and $4,300, respectively. The strong within-EV substitution patterns our model estimates
means that relaxing the 30D trade restrictions will tend to subsidize foreign EVs that have larger
negative externalities.
Panel (b) of Figure 7 shows the same distributions, but valued at a domestic SCC. Strikingly,
this change to the cost of CO2 emissions brings the cost of externalities below markups for the
majority of vehicles, implying that the majority of vehicles are priced above their domestic social
marginal cost. Absent profit shifting concerns, this suggests that for a US social planner using the
domestic SCC, optimal policy is a subsidy to correct for market power distortions, rather than a
tax. An alternative avenue for policy, outside the scope of our analysis, would be more aggressive
antitrust policy.
7
Effects of Counterfactual Policies
This section uses the equilibrium model to compare the IRA EV credits against counterfactuals.
7.1
Credit Repeal and Modified Trade and Income Restrictions
Table 7 reports results. Column 1 describes baseline outcomes under the IRA in July–August 2023.
Vehicle registrations. Panel (a) of Table 7 describes effects on total vehicle registrations.
Column 2 shows effects of eliminating all EV credits. Row 4 shows that eliminating the EV credits
decreases registrations of all EVs by 22 percent, or 260,000 EVs annually.
Row 7 shows that
eliminating the EV credits decreases the overall EV market share of new vehicle registrations by
a fifth. Consistent with the IRA’s “Buy American” goal, rows 5–6 show that the decrease in EV
registrations is concentrated among US firms’ EVs, which fall by 264,000 EVs annually, or 32
percent. Registrations of foreign firms’ EVs only slightly increase. Row 8 shows that a repeal
decreases leasing by a remarkable 20 percentage points, or by around two-thirds of baseline leasing
rates, because this counterfactual removes the leasing loophole.
Column 3 of Table 7 shows an alternative repeal of the IRA’s EV credits, reverting to pre-IRA
31


===== [PAGE 34] =====

policy as EV credits were phasing out.32 As discussed earlier, the key difference is that pre-IRA
policy in 2022 mostly subsidized foreign EVs, while the IRA’s trade restrictions disproportionately
subsidized US EVs. There are some similar patterns between the two repeals. Row 4 shows that
reverting to pre-IRA policy decreases EV registrations, albeit by about a third as much as entirely
eliminating the EV credits would. Row 8 shows that both repeals more than halve the EV leasing
rate, since both effectively eliminate the leasing loophole.
Row 9 shows the clearest difference
between the two repeal counterfactuals—eliminating the credits decreases the US assembly share
of EVs by 10 percentage points, while replacing the credits with pre-IRA policy decreases the US
assembly share of EVs by 20 percentage points.
How realistic are the magnitudes of these estimated effects of the IRA EV credits on EV reg-
istrations? One benchmark comes from Germany, which in December 2023 removed a $4,900 EV
subsidy. Annualized EV sales in the first 10 months of 2024 in Germany fell by 26.6 percent (Eu-
ropean Automobile Manufacturers’ Association 2024). While the German setting and magnitude
differs from the US subsidies we study, and the time series correlation may reflect other market
forces, the magnitude of Germany’s reduction in EV sales is in the ballpark of our projection that
repealing the IRA EV credits would decrease EV registrations by 22 percent.33
Table 7 shows that the IRA requires substantial government spending per additional EV reg-
istered. Row 10 shows that relative to a scenario with no EV credits, the IRA spends $26,500 of
government revenue per additional EV registration. Relative to pre-IRA policy, the IRA spends
$36,500 per incremental EV registration. These statistics exceed the nominal $7,500 in credit value
because many credits go to inframarginal consumers. The model indicates that relative to the sce-
nario with no EV credits, only 0.28 additional EVs are registered for every household that registers
an EV and claims an IRA credit, i.e., an additionality rate of 28 percent. Relative to pre-IRA
policy, that number falls to 16 percent.34
Environmental policies in other domains have broadly similar additionality rates, though some
research laments these values as low. For example, Aspelund and Russo (2024) estimate that 21
to 31 percent of US Conservation Reserve Program contracts for farm conservation are additional.
Chen, Ryan, and Xu (2024) finds that 28 percent of all firms are additional, though 64 percent of
registrants are additional.
Auto employment, battery manufacturing and investment. Panel (b) of Table 7 shows
32In this scenario, $7,500 purchase and lease credits without income eligibility restrictions were available for the
first 200,000 EVs each manufacturer sold and then phased out in the year after the manufacturer reached that limit.
As of July and August 2023, Tesla and GM would have received τ = κ = 0, Toyota and Ford would have received
τ = κ =$1,875, BMW and Stellantis would have received τ = κ =$3,750, and all other firms would have received
τ = κ =$7,500. By 2024, additional manufacturers would have reached their 200,000 limit, and pre-IRA policy would
have soon implied no tax credits available for any major manufacturer.
33An alternative US benchmark comes from the removal of EV credits under the One Big Beautiful Bill Act. EV
sales in October 2025 were 30 percent lower than one year prior, though that may be especially large because dealers
advertised the end date of the credits and many consumers bought EVs in the preceding months in anticipation of
credit expiry (Cox Automotive 2025).
34This quantity-based measure of additionality mirrors the definition in Aspelund and Russo (2024) as the number
of marginal households divided by the total number of households receiving credits. Since the model is discrete choice,
the number of households receiving credits equals the number of credit-eligible vehicles registered.
32


===== [PAGE 35] =====

that repealing the EV credits has important effects on two of the IRA’s stated goals in domestic
auto employment and domestic battery manufacturing.
Row 11 shows that repealing the EV
credits decreases US auto manufacturing employment by 12,000 to 15,000 jobs. Returning to pre-
IRA policy decreases employment somewhat more than eliminating EV credits does because, as
discussed, the pre-IRA counterfactual leads to fewer vehicles sold from US firms, and a majority
of vehicles from US firms are manufactured domestically. Rows 12–13 show that about one-third
of these affected workers assemble vehicles and two-thirds manufacture auto parts. Our estimates
of employment changes are relative to a baseline employment of approximately 850,000 jobs across
both auto parts and final assembly, so these changes represent a modest fraction of total industry
employment.
Row 15 shows that relative to pre-IRA policy, the total government spending on IRA EV
credits per US auto industry job created is $169,000 per job. Relative to no credits, the spending is
$563,000 per job. As a benchmark, this is 15 to 50 times larger than the $10,700 per job reported
in Slattery (2025) for the average discretionary government subsidy awarded per promised job in
their data.35 The credits are therefore not especially cost-effective when evaluated solely as a labor
market policy.
Row 14 shows that repealing the IRA also decreases the number of EV batteries assembled in
the US by about a quarter million annually. The two types of repeal have fairly similar magnitudes
and resemble the change in US firms’ EV registrations. This is again unsurprising because many
EVs from US firms are assembled domestically.
We can also use these estimates to learn about how the EV credits affect investment in EV
assembly capacity. In the short- to medium-run, firms could have used excess production capacity
at existing plants to meet this increased demand for EVs, but sustaining this level of production in
the long-run might incur capacity investment. Appendix D.5 discusses comparisons of the increased
EV registrations estimated in Table 7 to a few, large recent investments in vehicle assembly plants.
This comparison reflects a small number of case studies, but it suggests that the increase in US-
assembled EVs caused by the IRA is roughly on the order of $2.4 to $4 billion of additional
investment in EV assembly. This is in the ballpark of the capacity of one or possibly two additional
moderately large plants.
Social welfare.
Panel (c) of Table 7 translates these market outcomes into components of
social welfare. Row 16 shows that removing consumer subsidies under either type of credit repeal
decreases US consumer surplus. Rows 18–19 show a pair of results that encapsulate the profit
shifting aspect of industrial policy at the heart of our analysis—repealing the EV credits decreases
US producer surplus but increases foreign producer surplus. Typically, repealing subsidies harms a
broad set of firms in a market by lowering demand, but repealing the IRA’s EV credits actually helps
foreign firms operating in the US market. Rows 20–22 show that repealing the credits raises CO2
emissions, increasing both domestic and foreign externalities. If the US planner uses the domestic
35Appendix A.4 explains how we calculate the number of US workers per vehicle sold. These numbers represent
job-years, as they map the annual number of registrations to the number of workers involved. The $10,700 figure
from Slattery (2025) is per job-year.
33


===== [PAGE 36] =====

SCC, then a repeal increases foreign externalities three to five times more than it increases domestic
externalities. These patterns are also at the heart of our finding that the IRA in environmental terms
benefits foreign countries more than it benefits the US because it contributes to the global public
good of greenhouse gas mitigation.
Carbon mitigation cooperatively addresses global negative
externalities while profit shifting non-cooperatively decreases foreign welfare. Rows 25–28 sum this
all up. Repealing the EV credits decreases global surplus because the resulting decline in market
surplus exceeds the resulting increase in negative externalities.
Panel (d) of Table 7 reports the welfare cost per ton of CO2 abated. Since the IRA’s EV credits
raise domestic welfare while reducing CO2 emissions, row 30 shows that the cost per ton from the
domestic planner’s perspective is negative. This can be be interpreted as justifying policy under
any level of CO2 damages. From the global planner’s perspective, the marginal abatement cost is
positive at $60 per ton relative to no EV credits, and $14 per ton relative to pre-IRA policy.
Panel (e) of Table 7 shows the MVPFs of these policies. These vary from modest to moderate.
From the global planner’s perspective, the IRA credits generate $1.15 to $1.28 in benefits per dollar
of government spending. This is not a large MVPF, either relative to other policies (Hahn et al.
2024) or to common estimates of the marginal cost of public funds (Finkelstein and Hendren 2020).
Rows 32–33 show that, relative to pre-IRA policy, the US planner has a higher MVPF for the
IRA EV credits than the global planner does. This is surprising because in typical climate change
settings, the global planner values the global public good of greenhouse gas mitigation more than
the national planner does. Profit shifting in the IRA EV credits relative to pre-IRA policy explains
why this setting has the opposite pattern than a typical climate policy does. This asymmetry
between the IRA’s domestic and foreign impacts also reflects domestic political economy: passing
the IRA involved support from domestic manufacturing and labor interest groups, who valued the
IRA’s trade restrictions, and from environmental interest groups, who valued its climate change
mitigation.
Appendix Table A4 reports bootstrapped 95 percent confidence intervals; Appendix D.3 de-
scribes how we compute these. The tight confidence intervals reflect our precise parameter esti-
mates. For example, our confidence interval for the impact of eliminating the EV credits on EV
registrations ranges from 247,000 to 272,000. Similarly, our estimate of the confidence interval for
the change in auto manufacturing jobs is 11,700 to 12,900.
Appendix Table A5 considers settings with a marginal cost of public funds equal to 1.4, which
Finkelstein and Hendren (2020) consider as a benchmark, and alternative SCC values of $100 or
$200; Appendix D.4 discusses these sensitivity analyses. With a marginal cost of public funds equal
to 1.4, compared to no EV credits, the IRA EV credits decrease US and global welfare. In most
scenarios, the change in US surplus exceeds the change in global surplus, due to profit shifting.
Appendix Table A6 considers alternative specifications of demand and supply, which generally
support our headline results. Broadly, model uncertainty has somewhat similar magnitude im-
portance as statistical uncertainty—across these different model assumptions, the variation in key
magnitudes like lease and US assembly shares, CO2 emissions, MVPF, and cost per additional EV
34


===== [PAGE 37] =====

have a somewhat similar range as the confidence intervals reported in Appendix Table A4.
The final column of Appendix Table A6 considers a scenario that restricts the scope of profit
shifting by assuming non-Tesla EVs charge zero markup, effectively lowering prices to expand
dynamic benefits from learning-by-doing. We interpret this as extreme since near-term profits and
market power are potentially meaningful in this setting. In this scenario, the EV credits reduce
US surplus, and, from the US planner’s perspective, the IRA EV credits have an MVPF below one
compared to the counterfactual of no credits. This echoes our broader narrative that profit shifting
plays a central role in evaluation of these policies; assuming away profits decreases the resulting
domestic benefits.
Modifying trade restrictions. Columns 4–5 of Table 7 add trade restrictions for leases or
remove trade restrictions for purchases. These counterfactuals mostly close the incentive to lease
foreign vehicles, though not entirely as they preserve the income and MSRP eligibility restrictions
on purchases.
Panel (a) of Table 7 shows that trade restriction and trade relaxation generally produce opposite-
signed effects on market outcomes. Relative to the IRA baseline, row 4 shows that adding trade
restrictions to leases slightly decreases EV registrations, while removing trade restrictions moder-
ately increases EV registrations. Row 9 shows that adding trade restrictions to leases increases
the share of EVs assembled in the US, while removing trade restrictions for purchases decreases
this share by 9 percentage points. Row 8 shows that both counterfactuals decrease the lease share
by around half relative to the baseline leasing rate, since both counterfactuals treat purchases and
leases nearly symmetrically. The lease rate in these trade counterfactuals remains slightly above
the lease rate in the counterfactuals that repeal the IRA because these trade counterfactuals leave
the IRA’s income eligibility restrictions unchanged.
Panel (b) of Table 7 shows that the credits’ trade restrictions increase US auto employment
and battery assembly, although the magnitudes are small. Column 4 shows that closing the leasing
loophole by adding trade restrictions on leasing adds 750 jobs to the US auto sector, which is
positive in sign but minuscule in magnitude. Column 5 shows that allowing buyers to receive the
credits when purchasing a vehicle decreases US auto manufacturing employment by about 3,500
jobs.
Row 14 shows that these trade counterfactuals also change the number of EV batteries
assembled in the US by 10,000 to 30,000 per year. These magnitudes of mostly closing the leasing
loophole are less than a tenth of the magnitude of the effects of the EV credits overall compared
to repeal.
Panel (c) of Table 7 shows that the leasing loophole has poor welfare properties.
Row 23
shows that closing the loophole, either by adding trade restrictions on leases or removing them
for purchases, increases global welfare. Row 24 shows the same conclusion from the US planner’s
perspective using the global SCC. Row 25 shows that under the domestic SCC, adding trade restric-
tions to leases would also increase US welfare, although removing trade restrictions for purchases
slightly decreases US welfare. Panel (e) shows that the MVPF looks even worse. From the US
planner’s perspective, the MVPF of the leasing loophole ranges between 0.45 and 1.11, depending
35


===== [PAGE 38] =====

which social cost of carbon is used and whether the loophole is closed by changing policy for leases
or purchases. None of these MVPF values are particularly high.36
A few reasons explain why the leasing loophole performs poorly. Row 20 of Table 7 shows
that the credits’ “Buy American” provisions harm the environment since these trade restrictions
increase CO2, and since trade liberalization decreases CO2. The large leasing changes shown in row
8 demonstrate that more consumers will lease with sufficient incentives, but the large magnitude
of the required subsidies makes these subsidies relatively inefficient.
Overall, the trade restrictions reveals tradeoffs between trade and the environment, and between
foreign and domestic firms. Liberalizing trade benefits US consumers, by increasing the choice set of
subsidized vehicles, and increases EV registrations, thereby reducing global negative externalities,
but harms domestic producers. The greater weight and electricity consumption of “foreign” (30D-
ineligible) models moderates this tradeoff.
Removing income restrictions. The IRA incorporated income restrictions on credits, partly
to address the credits’ regressivity and limit its fiscal impact. In the years 2006–2021, households
with annual incomes above $200,000 received a majority of EV credits (Borenstein and Davis
2025). Appendix Figure A6 shows similar patterns in our data. Of course, the leasing loophole
relaxes the credits’ income restrictions, since high income buyers who leased could still qualify for
credits. Column 6 of Table 7 removes the income eligibility restrictions in the 30D tax credits. This
preserves the trade aspect of the leasing loophole, but eliminates the incentive for households with
high incomes to lease.
Column 6 of Table 7 shows that removing the income restrictions slightly increases EV regis-
trations, substantially increases the EV market share of US firms, and decreases CO2 emissions.
Row 31 shows that removing income restrictions has an MVPF of 1.46 from the global planner’s
perspective, because it decreases CO2 and so addresses global externalities. The MVPF is higher
from the US planner’s perspective because the US planner benefits from profit shifting in addition
to lower CO2.
Overall, we calculate that the trade restrictions explain most of the total observed increase in
leasing, and the income restrictions explain little. This counterfactual change in the EV credits’
income restrictions lets us assess how much of the observed increase in leasing reflected the leasing
loophole for income versus trade restrictions. As discussed previously, imposing trade restrictions
on leases while maintaining the income restrictions lowers the EV lease share by 16.4 percentage
points. Conversely, removing the income restrictions while maintaining the trade limits only lowers
the EV lease share by 2.8 percentage points. Since eliminating EV credits entirely lowers the lease
share by 19.5 percentage points, almost the same amount as the combined effect of the two changes,
we conclude that the trade restrictions account for about 85 percent (=16.4/19.5) of the observed
total change in leasing, and the income restrictions account for the rest.
36Because column 4 of Table 7 decreases government spending, the MVPF describes the higher-spending alternative,
i.e., it describes the MVPF of adding the leasing loophole in the IRA. Since this value is below one, the leasing loophole
is not an effective use of government spending and removing the loophole would be welfare improving.
36


===== [PAGE 39] =====

Removing the income restrictions, however, does increase the credits’ regressivity.
Row 35
shows that under the IRA, 44 percent of households earning above the threshold who purchased
an EV obtained the credits. Among high income households choosing EVs, the income restrictions
decreased the share receiving credits by about 33 percentage points. Clearly, the income restrictions
trade off climate benefits against redistribution. The income restrictions decreased the credits’
regressivity and saved the government money, but the leasing loophole shifted EV registrations to
foreign firms and to modestly less environmentally friendly vehicles.
7.2
Constrained Optimal Policies
This subsection analyzes the magnitude of constrained optimal subsidies, following the theoretical
discussion in Section 6.4. Column 1 of Table 8 shows observed values under the IRA. The coun-
terfactual in column 2 preserves the IRA’s 30D restrictions on which submodels qualify for credits,
but replaces the $7,500 IRA credit with the value of the single, uniform subsidy across submodels
that maximizes US total surplus using the domestic SCC.37 Column 3 allows the US planner to
value domestic auto manufacturing jobs (including for EVs and GVs) at $10,700 per job, as in Slat-
tery (2025). Column 4 lets the planner assign different subsidy amounts to each eligible submodel.
We calculate uniform subsidies in columns 2–3 using equation (12); we calculate the differentiated
subsidies in column 4 using equation (31) in Appendix E.2. Panel (a) shows market aggregates;
panels (b)–(d) show differences relative to a no EV subsidy baseline.
We do not believe that policymakers in 2022 purposefully chose the $7,500 actual credit value;
since they merely left it unchanged in nominal terms from earlier legislation. We study these spe-
cific counterfactuals to gain insight on the optimality of IRA subsidies within the framework of our
model. Comparing uniform with differentiated subsidies measures the gains from differentiation.
Comparing policy with and without value for domestic manufacturing jobs quantifies the impor-
tance of labor-related political economy considerations. In a neoclassical model of an economy at
full employment, creating jobs in a sector does not affect aggregate welfare, since it merely reallo-
cates employment between sectors. Under other assumptions, however, labor market frictions or
changes in local economic activity may generate welfare consequences to labor in particular regions
or sectors (Bartik 2015).
Row 1 of Table 8 shows that a uniform subsidy of $9,606 for 30D-eligible submodels maximizes
US welfare. This is about thirty percent above the actual IRA mean credit amount shown in column
1.38 Appendix Table A7 reports the decomposition of the subsidy following equation (12) and shows
37We apply these restrictions to the submodel as a whole and allow both purchases and leases to claim the subsidy
if a submodel is eligible, regardless of household income.
38The actual mean IRA credit amount, shown in column 1, is slightly below $7,500 because some vehicles only
qualify for $3,750 in credits due to battery or critical mineral supply chains only satisfying one of the two requirements
imposed in April 2023. We compute the mean credit amount conditional on 30D or 45W credit receipt, assuming
the full credit amount is claimed by taxpayers. In reality, households with lower tax liability may claim less than
the full amount of the credits due to their non-refundability (Borenstein and Davis 2025). We account for income
eligibility by omitting high-income households purchasing 30D-eligible vehicles from the average, though high-income
households who lease EVs are included.
37


===== [PAGE 40] =====

that profit shifting incentives account for 40 percent of the uniform subsidy value. Relative to the
IRA baseline in column 1, this higher subsidy in column 2 increases annual EV registrations by
101,000. Since the uniform subsidy treats purchases and leases symetrically, EV leasing rates fall
by over one-half. Rows 19–20 show that the combination of increasing the uniform subsidy level
and closing the leasing loophole increases US welfare from the IRA baseline by $1.2 to $1.7 billion
annually, depending on the social cost of carbon. Differentiating credits among vehicles as in column
4 increases US welfare by $2.1 to $3.3 billion annually. Uniform subsidies therefore achieve between
one-half and two-thirds of the welfare gains from differentiation.
Although domestic manufacturing employment was one leading rationale for the credits, we find
that the constrained optimal subsidy when numerically accounting for policymaker preference for
employment as in Slattery (2025) changes little. Under the domestic SCC and assuming an MCPF
of 1, accounting for the potential policymaker value for auto manufacturing employment raises the
constrained optimal EV subsidy by about 5 percent. Compared to that baseline uniform subsidy
in column 2 of Table 8, this higher subsidy increases government spending by $1 billion annually
and increases domestic auto manufacturing jobs by only 1,500. The fiscal cost per additional job
is an order of magnitude greater than the $10,700 job value used in the planner’s objective. This
echoes the finding in Slattery (2025), albeit from a completely different setting, that “the number
of new jobs the firm promises only explains about 10% of observed subsidies.”
Appendix D.4 discusses subsidy calculations under several alternative parameter assumptions,
presented in Appendix Tables A5 and A7. We consider other SCC values and values of the marginal
cost of public funds. We also report the constrained optimal uniform subsidy across alternative
model assumptions as a row in Appendix Table A6. The primary qualitative conclusions persist,
though some magnitudes vary.
8
Conclusion
The IRA was forecast to cost up to a trillion dollars (Bistline, Mehrotra, and Wolfram 2023),
making it among the most costly potential climate change investments in human history. It proved
short-lived, however, as just three years in, the One Big Beautiful Bill Act reversed most of its
provisions. We provide the first ex post microeconomic welfare analysis of a central component
of the IRA—tax credits to subsidize the purchase of new EVs, partly conditional on requirements
that supply chains locate in the US or allied countries. We assemble detailed data from numerous
sources on vehicle prices, quantities, leasing, subsidies, and environmental impacts. We present
descriptive facts on the market, event studies around the implementation of the tax credits, and an
equilibrium model of supply and demand to assess welfare impacts. In doing so, we also use this
setting to illustrate more general lessons on tradeoffs between foreign and domestic interests and
between trade and the environment.
Our event studies show that in the IRA’s inaugural year, the credits substantially increased
leasing, in line with trade, income, and price restrictions on eligibility. Our short-run event study
38


===== [PAGE 41] =====

analysis also finds suggestive evidence that consumers received most of the credits’ price impact,
though we interpret this evidence cautiously given evolving supply conditions at this time.
Our equilibrium model implies that the IRA’s EV credits have an MVPF of 1.1 to 2, through
shifting profits from foreign to domestic firms and decreasing negative externalities, though several
scenarios have substantially different consequences from the global versus US planner’s perspective.
Our analysis of the IRA’s EV credits highlights the important role of heterogeneity in external-
ities among EVs more broadly. Countries are implementing a wide range of policies to encourage
vehicle electrification, many without a focus on which EVs consumers adopt. For example, subsidies
to charging infrastructure are hard to target among different EVs. We find that the variation in
externalities within EVs versus GVs have similar magnitudes and considerable overlap, such that
that failing to subsidize (or tax) EVs proportionally to their heterogeneous externalities misses sub-
stantial opportunities for policy to increase welfare. Of course, our results reflect our externality
assumptions, which we have developed carefully but still reflect the state of the literature.
More broadly, our analysis highlights tradeoffs in green industrial policy between foreign and
domestic interests, and between trade and the environment. Traditionally, trade policy either repre-
sents a cooperative instrument (e.g., Most Favored Nation tariffs) or a non-cooperative instrument
(e.g., “Schedule 2” tariffs that apply to US imports from North Korea). Green industrial policy,
unusually, has both cooperative and non-cooperative elements within a single policy. The industrial
policy component is non-cooperative, as it seeks to exploit profit shifting to relocate growing clean
energy production domestically. The green component invests in the global public good of CO2
mitigation that partly benefits foreign countries, and may even use a cooperative perspective on
the environmental externality (e.g., the global SCC) to design and evaluate regulation.
While economists lament that countries are increasingly using trade restrictions to advance
climate change policy, partly led by the IRA, some policymakers celebrate this combination. The
global public goods nature of climate change mitigation can make voters and policymakers reluctant
to implement unilaterally stringent climate mitigation. Pairing climate change policy with trade
restrictions has provided political support for a growing set of green policies. Our analyses help
illustrate why—incorporating profit shifting into the domestic assessment of green policy increases
its domestic welfare gains, though generally at the expense of foreign surplus. Of course, as more
countries pair trade restrictions with climate change policy, global costs of trade restrictions grow.
We leave several unanswered questions. Focusing specifically on EV credits, an important line
of inquiry can study longer-run impacts of even temporary subsidies, as resulting relocation of
supply chains, learning-by-doing, and interactions with EV charging infrastructure could generate
important welfare and distributional effects. International reallocation of production due to the IRA
may require substantial movement of capital and other assets, and possibly distortions to production
scale (e.g., firms may duplicate production of a submodel across plants in different countries). This
could make dynamic estimates of costs exceed the static estimates that we provide.
Despite elimination of most IRA components under the One Big Beautiful Bill Act in 2025,
broader analysis of the IRA may also provide insight for ongoing and future research. Many of
39


===== [PAGE 42] =====

the IRA’s over 80 separate components have some attributes in common with the EV credits we
study—domestic content requirements, tax credits for green technologies, and extensions of prior
and smaller tax credits. Understanding what conclusions generalize across provisions of the IRA
would be valuable. Additionally, in response to the IRA, some US trading partners are considering
or implementing their own green industrial policies. Just as research has studied Nash tariffs by
nesting quantitative trade models within a game between countries (Ossa 2014), so too it might
be informative to study how the incentives for green industrial policy change when analyzing it as
strategic environmental policy choice among countries.
Why do countries design climate policy that benefits foreign countries, but via industrial policy,
which non-cooperatively shifts profits? International competition in industrial policy for a given
industry to some extent reflects a zero-sum game, while the climate is a global public good. In eval-
uating their priorities, what weight do policymakers in one country effectively put on environmental
benefits abroad? Regular international negotiations encourage weights above non-cooperative zero
on foreign climate benefits, but perhaps not equal to one. Domestic political economy likely con-
tributes to these decisions, though its exact mechanisms are unclear. Interest groups also play a
role—organized lobbies like auto firms benefit from industrial policy and create domestic political
pressure for non-cooperative policy. Our analysis studies this leading example of green industrial
policy, but it cannot explain all of the tensions that we have highlighted.
40


===== [PAGE 43] =====

References
Aldy, Joseph E., Matthew J. Kotchen, Robert N. Stavins, and James H. Stock 2021. “Keep climate policy
focused on the social cost of carbon”. Science 373.6557, pp. 850–852.
Allcott, Hunt, Giovanni Montanari, Bora Ozaltun, and Brandon Tan 2023. “An Economic View of Corporate
Social Impact”. NBER Working Paper 31803.
Anderson, Michael L. and Maximilian Auffhammer 2014. “Pounds That Kill: The External Costs of Vehicle
Weight”. Review of Economic Studies 81.2, pp. 535–571.
Arkolakis, Costas, Natalia Ramondo, Andr´es Rodr´ıguez-Clare, and Stephen Yeaple 2018. “Innovation and
Production in the Global Economy”. American Economic Review 108.8, pp. 2128–73.
Arkolakis, Costas and Conor Walsh 2023. “Clean Growth”. NBER Working Paper 31615.
Aspelund, Karl M. and Anna Russo 2024. “Additionality and Asymmetric Information in Environmental Markets:
Evidence from Conservation Auctions”. Mimeo, MIT.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger 2012. “Profit Shifting and Trade Agreements in Imperfectly Competitive
Markets”. International Economic Review 53.4, pp. 1067–1104.
Balboni, Clare and Joseph S. Shapiro 2024. “Spatial Environmental Economics”. Mimeo, LSE.
Barrett, Scott 1994. “Self-Enforcing International Environmental Agreements”. Oxford Economic Papers 46, pp. 878–
894.
Bartik, Timothy J. 2015. “The Social Value of Job Loss and Its Effect on the Costs of U.S. Environmental
Regulations”. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 9.2, pp. 179–197.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Hyuk-Soo Kwon, and Shanjun Li 2024. “Attribute-based Subsidies and Market Power: an
Application to Electric Vehicles”. NBER Working Paper 32264.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Hyuk-Soo Kwon, Shanjun Li, and Nahim Bin Zahur 2025. “Drive Down the Cost:
Learning by Doing and Government Policies in the Global EV Battery Industry”. NBER Working Paper 33378.
Bento, Antonio M., Lawrence H. Goulder, Mark R. Jacobsen, and Roger H. von Haefen 2009. “Distri-
butional and Efficiency Impacts of Increased US Gasoline Taxes”. American Economic Review 99(3), pp. 667–
699.
Bernstein, Alex 2024. “EV Tax Credit Loophole Explained”. CarsDirect. January 18. https://web.archive.org/
web/20240805032000/https://www.carsdirect.com/deals-articles/ev-tax-credit-loophole-explained
(accessed Nov. 3, 2025).
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes 1999. “Voluntary Export Restraints on Automobiles: Evalu-
ating a Trade Policy”. American Economic Review 89.3, pp. 400–430.
—
2004. “Differentiated Products Demand Systems from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The New Car
Market”. Journal of Political Economy 112 (1), pp. 68–105.
Berry, Steven T. 1994. “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation”. RAND Journal of Eco-
nomics, pp. 242–262.
Bistline, John, Neil Mehrotra, and Catherine Wolfram 2023. “Economic Implications of the Climate Provisions
of the Inflation Reduction Act”. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 77–157.
Bombardini, Matilde, Andres Gonzales-Lira, Bingjing Li, and Chiara Motta 2024. “The Increasing Cost of
Buying American”. NBER Working Paper 32953.
Borenstein, Severin and James B. Bushnell 2022. “Do Two Electricity Pricing Wrongs Make a Right? Cost
Recovery, Externalities, and Efficiency”. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 14.4, pp. 80–110.
Borenstein, Severin and Lucas W. Davis 2025. “The Distributional Effects of US Tax Credits for Heat Pumps,
Solar Panels, and Electric Vehicles”. National Tax Journal 78.1, pp. 263–288.
Boudette, Neal E. 2023. “Tesla Cuts Prices Sharply as It Moves to Bolster Demand”. The New York Times.
January 13. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/13/business/tesla-price-cut.html (accessed Feb. 2, 2024).
—
2024. “Ford Took an Early Lead in Electric Vehicles. Now G.M. Is Surging.” The New York Times. https:
//www.nytimes.com/2024/10/29/business/ford-general-motors-electric-vehicles.html.
Bown, Chad 2023. “Industrial policy for electric vehicle supply chains and the US-EU fight over the Inflation
Reduction Act”. PIIE Working Papers 23-1.
Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer 1981. “Tariffs and the Extraction of Foreign Monopoly Rents under
Potential Entry”. Canadian Journal of Economics 14.3, pp. 371–389.
—
1984. “Trade warfare: Tariffs and cartels”. Journal of International Economics 16.3–4, pp. 227–242.
Buchanan, James M. 1969. “External Economies, Corrective Taxes, and Market Structure”. American Economic
Review 59(1), pp. 174–177.
Buckberg, Elaine 2023. “Clean vehicle tax credit: The new industrial policy and its impact”. SIEPR Policy Brief.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, Marcelo Dolabella, Mauricio Moreira, Matthew Murillo, and Fernando Parro 2024.
“Voluntary Emission Restraints in Developing Economies: The Role of Trade Policy”. NBER Working Paper
32459.
41


===== [PAGE 44] =====

Cao, Sissi 2023. “Tesla Isn’t Alone in Cutting EV Price as Economic Conditions Now Favor Car Buyers”. Observer.
February 1. https://observer.com/2023/02/tesla-ford-electric-car-price-cut/ (accessed Feb. 5, 2024).
Capital One 2024. Is There a Standard Car Depreciation Formula? https://www.capitalone.com/cars/learn/
getting-a-good-deal/is-there-a-standard-car-depreciation-formula/1557 (accessed Mar. 20, 2024).
Cardell, N. Scott 1997. “Variance Components Structures for the Extreme-Value and Logistic Distributions with
Application to Models of Heterogeneity”. Econometric Theory 13.2, pp. 185–213.
Chandra, Ambarish, Sumeet Gulati, and Milind Kandlikar 2010. “Green drivers or free riders? An analysis of
tax rebates for hybrid vehicles”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 60.2, pp. 78–93.
Chen, Qiaoyi, Nicholas Ryan, and Daniel Yi Xu 2024. “Adverse Selection in Carbon Offset Markets: Evidence
from the Clean Development Mechanism in China”. Mimeo, Yale.
Cherniwchan, Jevan, Brian R. Copeland, and M. Scott Taylor 2017. “Trade and the Environment: New
Methods, Measurement, and Results”. Annual Review of Economics 9, pp. 59–85.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Michael Stepner, and Opportunity Insights Team 2024. “The Economic
Impacts of COVID-19: Evidence from a New Public Database Built Using Private Sector Data”. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 139 (2), pp. 829–889.
Clinton, Bentley C. and Daniel C. Steinberg 2019. “Providing the Spark: Impact of financial incentives on
battery electric vehicle adoption”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 98.102255.
Cole, Cassandra, Michael Droste, Christopher Knittel, Shanjun Li, and James H. Stock 2023. “Policies for
Electrifying the Light-Duty Vehicle Fleet in the United States”. AEA Papers and Proceedings 113, pp. 316–22.
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget 2023. IRA Energy Provisions Could Cost Two-Thirds More Than
Originally Estimated. https://www.crfb.org/blogs/ira-energy-provisions-could-cost-two-thirds-more-
originally-estimated.
Copeland, Brian R., Joseph S. Shapiro, and M. Scott Taylor 2022. “Globalization and the Environment”.
Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 5. Ed. by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth
Rogoff. Elsevier Science Publishing, pp. 61–146.
Copeland, Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor 2003. Trade and the Environment: Theory and Evidence. Princeton
University Press.
Co¸sar, A. Kerem, Paul L.E. Grieco, Shengyu Li, and Felix Tintelnot 2018. “What drives home market
advantage?” Journal of International Economics 110, pp. 135–150.
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Cory Smith 2016. “Evolving Comparative Advantage and the Impact
of Climate Change in Agricultural Markets: Evidence from 1.7 Million Fields around the World”. Journal of
Political Economy 124.1, pp. 205–248.
Cox, Lydia and Miguel Acosta 2023. “Buy American Restrictions on Government Purchases: Implications for U.S.
Manufacturing”. Mimeo, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Cox Automotive 2025. EV Market Monitor – October 2025. Tech. rep. https://www.coxautoinc.com/insights-
hub/ev-market-monitor-october-2025/(accessedNovember19,2025).
Davis, William P. 2023. “Want to Buy an Electric Car? Read This First”. New York Times. March 28. https:
//www.nytimes.com/2023/03/28/automobiles/want-to-buy-an-electric-car-read-this-first.html
(accessed Nov. 3, 2025).
Deese, Brian 2021. “Brian Deese on Biden’s vision for ‘a twenty-first-century American industrial strategy’”. Atlantic
Council. Prepared remarks.
Desmet, Klaus and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg 2024. “Climate Change Economics over Time and Space”. Annual
Review of Economics 16, pp. 271–304.
Diamond, Peter A. 1973. “Consumption externalities and imperfect corrective pricing”. Bell Journal of Economics
and Management Science 4.2, pp. 526–538.
Domonoske, Camila 2025. “Trump administration rolls back fuel economy standards”. NPR. December 3. https:
//www.npr.org/2025/12/03/nx-s1-5630389/trump-administration-rolls-back-fuel-economy-standards
(accessed Dec. 12, 2025).
Edmunds 2024. Days to Turn by Model. Retrieved via Bloomberg Intelligence; Accessed: 2024-5-8.
European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association 2024. New Car Registrations, European Union. https:
//www.acea.auto/files/Press_release_car_registrations_October_2024.pdf(accessedNovember25,2024).
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Patrick J. Kennedy, and Amit K. Kandelwal 2020. “The
Return to Protectionism”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 135.1, pp. 1–55.
Farrokhi, Farid and Ahmad Lashkaripour 2025. “Can Trade Policy Mitigate Climate Change?” Econometrica
93.5, pp. 1561–1599.
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 2024a. Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items in U.S.
City Average [CPIAUCSL]. Retrieved from FRED; accessed: 2024-9-5.
—
2024b. Finance Rate on Consumer Installment Loans at Commercial Banks, New Autos 48 Month Loan [TERM-
CBAUTO48NS]. Retrieved from FRED; accessed: 2024-7-12.
42


===== [PAGE 45] =====

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 2024c. Total Households [TTLHH]. Retrieved from FRED; accessed: 2024-9-18.
Feltz, Carol J. and G. Edward Miller 1996. “An asymptotic test for the equality of coefficients of variation from
k populations”. Statistics in Medicine 15.6, pp. 647–658.
Finkelstein, Amy and Nathaniel Hendren 2020. “Welfare Analysis Meets Causal Inference”. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 34.4, pp. 146–167.
Flaaen, Aaron, Ali Horta¸csu, and Felix Tintelnot 2020. “The Production Relocation and Price Effects of US
Trade Policy: The Case of Washing Machines”. American Economic Review 110.7, pp. 2103–27.
Fowlie, Meredith, Christopher R. Knittel, and Catherine Wolfram 2012. “Sacred Cars? Cost-Effective Reg-
ulation of Stationary and Nonstationary Pollution Sources”. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4.1,
pp. 98–126.
Fowlie, Meredith, Mar Reguant, and Stephen P. Ryan 2016. “Market-Based Emissions Regulation and Industry
Dynamics”. Journal of Political Economy 124.1, pp. 249–302.
France 24 2022. “Biden tells Macron that Inflation Reduction Act can be ‘tweaked’ to include Europe allies”.
Galichon, Alfred 2022. “On the Representation of the Nested Logit Model”. Econometric Theory 38.2, pp. 370–380.
Gallagher, Kelly Sims and Erich Muehlegger 2011. “Giving green to get green? Incentives and consumer adoption
of hybrid vehicle technology”. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 61.1, pp. 1–15.
Ganapati, Sharat, Joseph S. Shapiro, and Reed Walker 2020. “Energy Cost Pass-Through in U.S. Manufac-
turing: Estimates and Implications for Carbon Taxes”. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 12.2,
pp. 303–42.
Garrido, Francisco 2024. “An aggregative approach to pricing equilibrium among multi-product firms with nested
demand”. The RAND Journal of Economics 55.3, pp. 359–374.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou 1995. “Product Differentiation and Oligopoly in International Markets: The Case
of the U.S. Automobile Industry”. Econometrica 63.4, pp. 891–951.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Frank Verboven 2001. “The Evolution of Price Dispersion in the European
Car Market”. Review of Economic Studies 68.4, pp. 811–848.
Gopinath, Gita and Brent Neiman 2026. “The Incidence of Tariffs: Rates and Reality”. NBER Working Paper
34620.
Goulder, Lawrence H 2020. “Timing is everything: how economists can better address the urgency of stronger
climate policy”. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 14.1, pp. 143–156.
Grieco, Paul L.E., Charles Murry, and Ali Yurukoglu 2024. “The Evolution of Market Power in the U.S.
Automobile Industry”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 139.2, pp. 1201–1253.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman 1994. “Protection for Sale”. American Economic Review 84.4,
pp. 833–850.
Hahn, Robert W., Nathaniel Hendren, Robert D. Metcalfe, and Ben Sprung-Keyser 2024. “A Welfare
Analysis of Policies Impacting Climate Change”. NBER Working Paper 32728.
Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer, Marc Melitz, and Chenying Yang 2026. “Industrial Policies for Multi-Stage
Production: The Battle for Battery-Powered Vehicles”. NBER Working Paper 34884.
Hendren, Nathaniel and Ben Sprung-Keyser 2020. “A Unified Welfare Analysis of Government Policies”. Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 135.3, pp. 1209–1318.
Holland, Stephen P., Erin T. Mansur, Nicholas Z. Muller, and Andrew J. Yates 2016. “Are There Environ-
mental Benefits from Driving Electric Vehicles? The Importance of Local Factors”. American Economic Review
106.12, pp. 3700–3729.
—
2019. “Distributional Effects of Air Pollution from Electric Vehicle Adoption”. Journal of the Association of
Environmental and Resource Economists 6.S1, S65–S94.
—
2020. “Decompositions and Policy Consequences of an Extraordinary Decline in Air Pollution from Electricity
Generation”. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 12.4, pp. 244–74.
Holland, Stephen P., Erin T. Mansur, Valentin Verdier, and Andrew J. Yates 2024. “A New Estimator for
Marginal Emissions”. NBER Working Paper 32065.
Hsiao, Allan 2024. “Coordination and Commitment in International Climate Action: Evidence from Palm Oil”.
Mimeo, Stanford.
IEA 2024. Global EV Outlook 2024. Tech. rep. url: https://www.iea.org/reports/global-ev-outlook-2024.
Internal Revenue Service 2023. Statistics of Income: Individual Income Tax Returns. Tech. rep. Publication 1304.
Jacobsen, Mark R. 2013. “Evaluating US Fuel Economy Standards in a Model with Producer and Household
Heterogeneity”. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5.2, pp. 148–187.
Jacobsen, Mark R. and Arthur A. van Benthem 2015. “Vehicle Scrappage and Gasoline Policy”. American
Economic Review 105.3, pp. 1312–38.
Jacobsen, Mark R., Christopher R. Knittel, James M. Sallee, and Arthur A. van Benthem 2020. “The Use
of Regression Statistics to Analyze Imperfect Pricing Policies”. Journal of Political Economy 128.5, pp. 1826–
1876.
43


===== [PAGE 46] =====

Jacobsen, Mark R., James M. Sallee, Joseph S. Shapiro, and Arthur A. van Benthem 2023. “Regulating
Untaxable Externalities: Are Vehicle Air Pollution Standards Effective and Efficient?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 138.3, pp. 1907–1976.
Jenn, Alan, Ines L. Azevedo, and Pedro Ferreira 2013. “The impact of federal incentives on the adoption of
hybrid electric vehicles in the United States”. Energy Economics 40, pp. 936–942.
Jenn, Alan, Katalin Springel, and Anand R. Gopal 2018. “Effectiveness of electric vehicle incentives in the
United States”. Energy Policy 119, pp. 349–356.
Jensen, Liselotte 2025. “Industrial Accelerator Act”. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/legislative-train/
theme- a- new- plan- for- europe- s- sustainable- prosperity- and- competitiveness/file- industrial-
decarbonisation-accelerator-act (accessed Dec. 5, 2025).
Kelly, Jarod C., Amgad Elgowainy, Raphael Isaac, Jacob Ward, Ehsan Islam, Aymeric Rousseau, Ian
Sutherland, Timothy J. Wallington, Marcus Alexander, Matteo Muratori, Matthew Franklin, Jesse
Adams, and Neha Rustagi 2022. Cradle-to-Grave Lifecycle Analysis of U.S. Light-Duty Vehicle-Fuel Pathways:
A Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Economic Assessment of Current (2020) and Future (2030-2035) Technologies.
Tech. rep. Argonne National Laboratory.
Knittel, Christopher R. and Ryan Sandler 2018. “The Welfare Impact of Second-Best Uniform-Pigouvian Tax-
ation: Evidence from Transportation”. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10.4, pp. 211–242.
Kortum, Samuel and David A. Weisbach 2021. “Optimal Unilateral Carbon Policy”. Cowles Foundation Dis-
cussion Paper No. 2311.
Kotchen, Matthew J. 2018. “Which social cost of carbon? A theoretical perspective”. Journal of the Association
of Environmental and Resource Economists 5.3, pp. 673–694.
Larch, Mario and Joschka Wanner 2017. “Carbon tariffs: An analysis of the trade, welfare, and emission effects”.
Journal of International Economics 109, pp. 195–213.
Leruth, Luc, Adnan Mazarei, Pierre Regibeau, and Luc Renneboog 2022. “Green energy depends on critical
minerals. Who controls the supply chains?” PIIE Working Papers 22-12.
Levaggi, Orsella and Paolo M. Panteghini 2023. “Environmental taxation and profit-shifting activities”. Ecolog-
ical Economics 214, p. 107972.
Linn, Joshua 2022. “Balancing Equity and Effectiveness for Electric Vehicle Subsidies”. RFF Working Paper 22-7.
Lohawala, Nafisa 2023. “Roadblock or Accelerator? The Effect of Electric Vehicle Subsidy Elimination”. RFF
Working Paper 23-13.
Manchin, Joe 2024. Manchin Supports Inflation Reduction Act of 2022. https://www.manchin.senate.gov/
newsroom/press-releases/manchin-supports-inflation-reduction-act-of-2022 (accessed Dec. 14, 2023).
McFadden, Daniel 1978. “Modeling the Choice of Residential Location”. Transportation Research Record 673,
pp. 72–77.
Miravete, Eugenio J., Maria J. Mor´al, and Jeff Thurk 2018. “Fuel taxation, emissions policy, and competitive
advantage in the diffusion of European diesel automobiles”. The RAND Journal of Economics 49.3, pp. 504–540.
Miravete, Eugenio J., Katja Seim, and Jeff Thurk 2023. “Pass-through and tax incidence in differentiated
product markets”. International Journal of Industrial Organization 90, p. 102985.
Muehlegger, Erich and David S. Rapson 2022. “Subsidizing low-and middle-income adoption of electric vehicles:
Quasi-experimental evidence from California”. Journal of Public Economics 216, p. 104752.
Nguyen-Tien, Viet, Robert J.R. Elliott, Eric Strobl, and Chengyu Zhang 2024. “Estimating the longevity
of electric vehicles: What do 300 million MOT test results tell us?” CEP Discussion Paper No. 1972.
Nocke, Volker and Nicolas Schutz 2018. “Multiproduct-Firm Oligopoly: An Aggregative Games Approach”.
Econometrica 86.2, pp. 523–557.
Nordhaus, William 2015. “Climate Clubs: Overcoming Free-Riding in International Climate Policy”. American
Economic Review 105.4, pp. 1339–70.
Ossa, Ralph 2014. “Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data”. American Economic Review 104.12, pp. 4104–4146.
Pl¨otz, Patrick, Cornelius Moll, Georg Bieker, Peter Mock, and Yaoming Li 2020. “Real-world usage of plug-
in hybrid electric vehicles: fuel consumption, electric driving, and CO2 emissions”. https://theicct.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/PHEV-white-paper-sept2020-0.pdf. ICCT White Paper.
Pritchard, Tom 2023. These Are the Tesla Wait Times for Every Model. https://www.tomsguide.com/reference/
tesla-wait-times-how-long-it-takes-to-get-every-tesla-model.
Ricke, Katharine, Laurent Drouet, Ken Caldeira, and Massimo Tavoni 2018. “Country-level social cost of
carbon”. Nature Climate Change 8.10, pp. 895–900.
Rose, Michel and Jeff Mason 2022. “U.S. Inflation Reduction Act ‘super aggressive,’ Macron tells lawmakers”.
Reuters.
Roth, Jonathan 2024. “Interpreting Event-Studies from Recent Difference-in-Differences Methods”. Mimeo, Brown.
Roth, Jonathan, Pedro H.C. Sant’Anna, Alyssa Bilinski, and John Poe 2023. “What’s trending in difference-
in-differences? A synthesis of the recent econometrics literature”. Journal of Econometrics 235.2, pp. 2218–2244.
44


===== [PAGE 47] =====

Sallee, James M. 2011. “The surprising incidence of tax credits for the Toyota Prius”. American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 3.2, pp. 189–219.
Shapiro, Joseph S. 2021. “The Environmental Bias of Trade Policy”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 136.2,
pp. 831–886.
—
2024. “Institutions, Comparative Advantage, and the Environment”. Mimeo, UC Berkeley.
Shapiro, Joseph S. and Reed Walker 2018. “Why is Pollution from US Manufacturing Declining? The Roles of
Environmental Regulation, Productivity, and Trade”. American Economic Review 108.12, pp. 3814–54.
Sheldon, Tamara L. and Rubal Dua 2019. “Measuring the cost-effectiveness of electric vehicle subsidies”. Energy
Economics 84, p. 104545.
Shepardson, David and Aishwarya Nair 2023. “Ford to Cut Prices of Mustang Mach-E, Following Tesla’s Lead”.
Reuters. January 30. https : / / www . reuters . com / business / autos - transportation / ford - cuts - price -
mustang-mach-e-2023-01-30/ (accessed Feb. 5, 2024).
Slattery, Cailin 2025. “Bidding for Firms: Subsidy Competition in the United States”. Journal of Political Economy
133.8, pp. 2563–2614.
Slowik, Peter, Stephanie Searle, Hussein Basma, Josh Miller, Yuanrong Zhou, Felipe Rodr ˜Aguez, Claire
Buysse, Ray Minjares, Sara Kelly, Logan Pierce, Robbie Orvis, and Sara Baldwin 2023. “Analyzing
The impact of the Inflation Reduction Act on electric vehicle uptake in the United States”. ICCT White Paper.
Small, Kenneth A. and Harvey S. Rosen 1981. “Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete Choice Models”.
Econometrica 49.1, pp. 105–130.
Sullivan, Jake 2023. “Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan on Renewing American Economic Lead-
ership at the Brookings Institution”.
Tesla 2023. Design Your Model 3 — Tesla. https://www.tesla.com/model3/design#overview. Accessed: 2023-12-
22.
The Internet Archive 2023. The Wayback Machine. https://archive.org.
Tintelnot, Felix 2017. “Global Production with Export Platforms”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132.1, pp. 157–
209.
US Department of Transportation 2024. Departmental Guidance on Valuation of a Statistical Life in Eco-
nomic Analysis. https : / / www . transportation . gov / office - policy / transportation - policy / revised -
departmental-guidance-on-valuation-of-a-statistical-life-in-economic-analysis (accessed July 12,
2024).
US EPA 2014. Federal Register Vol. 79, No. 81: Control of Air Pollution From Motor Vehicles: Tier 3 Motor Vehicle
Emission and Fuel Standards. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2014-04-28/pdf/2014-06954.pdf
(accessed July 12, 2024).
—
2023. EPA Report on the Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases: Estimates Incorporating Recent Scientific Advances.
Tech. rep.
—
2024a. Certified Vehicle Test Results Report Data (Model Years: 2014 - Present). https://www.epa.gov/system/
files/documents/2024-02/light-duty-vehicle-test-results-report-2014-present.xlsx (accessed July
12, 2024).
—
2024b. The 2024 EPA Automotive Trends Report: Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Executive Summary Fuel Economy,
and Technology since 1975. Tech. rep.
Venables, Anthony J. 1985. “Trade and trade policy with imperfect competition: The case of identical products
and free entry”. Journal of International Economics 19.1, pp. 1–19.
Wards Intelligence 2022. “Ward’s Automotive Yearbook 2022”.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2014. “Can Negotiating a Uniform Carbon Price Help to Internalize the Global Warming
Externality?” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 1.1/2, pp. 29–49.
Weyl, E. Glen and Michal Fabinger 2013. “Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principles of Incidence under
Imperfect Competition”. Journal of Political Economy 121.3, pp. 528–583.
White House 2023. WHAT THEY ARE SAYING: One Year Anniversary of the Inflation Reduction Act. https:
//www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/08/17/what-they-are-saying-one-
year-anniversary-of-the-inflation-reduction-act/. August 17. Available at https://www.presidency.
ucsb.edu/documents/fact- sheet- one- year- president- bidens- inflation- reduction- act- driving-
historic-climate.
Worland, Justin 2024. “How Continuity in U.S. Climate Policy Pays Off”. Time. September 23.
Xing, Jianwei, Benjamin Leard, and Shanjun Li 2021. “What Does an Electric Vehicle Replace?” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 107, p. 102432.
Yablon, Alex 2023. “Why Europe is so angry about Biden’s signature climate bill”. Vox. https://www.vox.com/
world-politics/2023/7/24/23801726/europe-biden-inflation-reduction-act-climate-economy.
Zeckhauser, Richard 1981. “Preferred policies when there is a concern for probability of adoption”. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 8.3, pp. 215–237.
45


===== [PAGE 48] =====

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Mean
Std. dev.
Min.
Max.
Obs.
Registrations
1,079
1,887
26
38,781
19,019
Purchase price ($000s)
51.3
19.3
12.7
96.7
17,691
Lease price ($000s)
48.1
20.9
16.3
372.3
15,746
Percent leased
25.1
17.8
0
100
19,019
Notes: This table presents summary statistics for our submodel-by-month panel of new vehicle sales and
prices for 2022 and 2023. Registration counts are from Experian. Purchase prices are from the California
DMV; lease prices are computed from combining lease term data from Cox Automotive with purchase prices
from the California DMV.
Table 2: Share-Weighted Average Externalities by Vehicle Powertrain
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Electric Vehicles
All EVs
Battery
electric
vehicles
Plug-in
hybrids
Gasoline
vehicles
Structural model
outside option
(used GVs)
Manufacturing + scrap CO2 (global SCC)
2,974
3,142
2,156
1,815
–
Driving CO2 (global SCC)
6,958
6,042
11,389
13,597
13,597
Driving local pollutants
559
558
561
377
377
Excess weight in accidents
9,277
9,114
10,069
7,058
7,058
Positive fiscal externality
(5,764)
(5,807)
(5,558)
(3,520)
(3,520)
Total negative externality
Global SCC
14,003
13,050
18,617
19,327
17,513
Domestic SCC
5,215
4,923
6,631
5,689
5,480
Notes: This table presents market share-weighted average lifetime externalities across submodels within a
powertrain, weighting submodels by average monthly sales in months when the submodel was available. Units
are $/vehicle. Positive fiscal externalities are shown in parentheses to emphasize they are opposite-signed to
damages.
46


===== [PAGE 49] =====

Table 3: Variation in Externalities by Powertrain
Coefficient of variation
Interdecile ratio
EVs
GVs
EVs
GVs
BEVs
PHEVs
all
BEVs
PHEVs
all
Panel (a): Global SCC
Total negative externalities
0.24
0.23
0.25
0.25
1.06
1.05
1.08
1.07
[0.946]
[−0.01, 0.01]
Carbon damages
0.11
0.22
0.20
0.19
1.03
1.08
1.05
1.05
[0.600]
[−0.01, 0.01]
SMC minus price
0.54
0.42
0.52
0.38
1.13
1.11
1.19
1.12
[0.000]
[0.02, 0.14]
Panel (b): Domestic SCC
Total negative externalities
0.44
0.28
0.39
0.50
1.12
1.08
1.11
1.17
[0.014]
[−0.09, −0.03]
Carbon damages
0.11
0.22
0.20
0.19
1.04
1.10
1.07
1.06
[0.600]
[−0.01, 0.02]
SMC minus price
-1.18
-1.03
-1.17
-1.00
-
-
-
-
[0.212]
-
Notes: All quantities are computed at the submodel level, unweighted. Interdecile ratio is the 90th sample
percentile divided by the 10th sample percentile of log externalities. BEVs are battery electric vehicles,
PHEVs are plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. SMC is social marginal cost, computed as the sum of each
submodel’s marginal cost of production with its negative externalities. As the 10th percentile of this measure
is negative, we cannot report the interdecile ratio in Panel (b). Bracketed values in the Coefficient of variation
column are p-values for the difference in coefficients of variation between GVs and all EVs, computed
following Feltz and Miller (1996); bracketed values in the Interdecile ratio column are bootstrapped 95
percent confidence intervals for the difference in interdecile ratio between GVs and all EVs.
Table 4: Parameter Assumptions and Empirical Moments
Description
Source
Target
Value
Model
Value
Market size (million/year)
Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis (2024c)
21.9
–
Population shares and average income
Internal Revenue Service
(2023), Table 2
–
–
Model-level demand elasticity
Grieco, Murry, and
Yurukoglu (2024)
-5.36
-5.36
Share of EV buyers whose 2nd choice is EV
NVES
53.1%
53.1%
Share of EV buyers whose 2nd choice is an EV
in the same vehicle class
NVES
34.2%
34.2%
Difference in average transaction prices,
high- vs. low-income households
NVES
$13,647
$13,647
Ratio of inside good choice probability,
high- vs. low-income households
NVES, Internal Revenue
Service (2023)
1.99
1.99
Difference in EV choice propensity,
high- vs. low-income households
NVES
13.6pp
13.6pp
Difference in lease choice propensity,
high- vs. low-income households
NVES
0.5pp
0.5pp
Excluded Aug 2022 group lease price change
Appendix Table A2
-$5,677
–
Excluded Aug 2022 group lease share effect
Appendix Table A2
39%
39%
Notes: This table presents empirical moments we match and other parameter assumptions used in the
demand estimation in Section 6. High-income households are those that report income above $300,000 in
the survey; low-income households are those that report income below $300,000 in the survey. Refer to
Appendix D.1 for additional details on computing the moments.
47


===== [PAGE 50] =====

Table 5: Parameter Estimates
Parameter
Description
Value
Standard error
α0
Price response parameter
-0.383
0.023
αy
Price response × income interaction
-0.237
0.004
β0
Inside good × income interaction
0.478
0.067
βEV
EV × income interaction
0.530
0.008
βLease
Lease × income interaction
0.031
0.002
σg
EV-GV nest parameter
0.388
0.009
σc
Class nest parameter
0.530
0.007
σk
Submodel nest parameter
0.880
0.019
Notes: This table presents parameter estimates from the demand estimation in Section 6.
Table 6: Moments Not Formally Targeted: Measures of Model Fit
Statistic
Model Value
Reference Value
Panel (a) Second Choice Measures
Share of GV buyers with GV second choice
95.7%
96.8% (NVES)
Average MPG(e) of second choice, EV buyers
67.2
66.6 (NVES)
Average MPG(e) of second choice, GV buyers
30.0
27.6 (NVES)
US firm share of second choices, US firm first choice
38.5%
62.2% (NVES)
Domestic assembled share of second choices,
39.3%
57.7% (NVES)
domestic assembled first choice
Correlation (share-weighted), class-powertrain
0.91
(Figure 6)
aggregate second choices
Correlation (share-weighted), class-powertrain
0.99
(Figure 6)
aggregate second choices, EV first and second choice
Panel (b): Price Measures
Aggregate new vehicle market demand elasticity
-1.1
-1 (Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes 2004)
-1.29 (Grieco, Murry, and Yurukoglu 2024)
Aggregate EV demand elasticity
-2.6
-0.92 (Allcott et al. 2023)
-2.8 (Xing, Leard, and Li 2021)
Pass-through of lease credits to lease prices
$8,022
$4,055 to $7,299
relative to buy prices
(Appendix Table A2)
Pass-through of IRA credits to purchase prices
$7,024
$6,879 to $8,865
(Section 5.2)
Share-weighted average markup
20% (EV)
22%
19% (GV)
(Grieco, Murry, and Yurukoglu 2024)
Notes: This table presents statistics on data moments that we do not formally target, as discussed near
the end of Section 6.2. All second choice statistics are weighted by the market share (or survey share) of
the first choice unless otherwise specified. The range of reference values for pass-through are the 95 percent
confidence intervals of our regression estimates.
48


===== [PAGE 51] =====

Table 7: Effects of Counterfactual Policies on Market and Welfare Outcomes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Repeal IRA
Modify Trade Limits
IRA
(baseline)
Eliminate
EV
Credits
Return to
Pre-IRA
30D with
phaseout
IRA, add
trade re-
strictions
on leases
IRA,
remove
trade re-
strictions
IRA,
remove
income
threshold
Panel (a): Market Aggregates under Counterfactual Scenario
1.
Vehicle registrations (000s/year)
10,633
10,519
10,596
10,613
10,688
10,634
2.
US firms (000s/year)
4,017
3,804
3,738
4,027
3,970
4,032
3.
Foreign firms (000s/year)
6,616
6,714
6,858
6,586
6,718
6,602
4.
EV registrations (000s/year)
1,184
924
1,117
1,134
1,313
1,199
5.
US firms (000s/year)
835
571
543
834
812
856
6.
Foreign firms (000s/year)
349
353
574
300
501
343
7.
EV market share (%)
11.1
8.8
10.5
10.7
12.3
11.3
8.
Lease share, within EVs (%)
29.3
9.8
10.8
12.9
15.4
26.5
9.
US assembly share, within EVs (%)
70.5
61.0
50.6
73.8
61.3
71.3
10.
Cost per additional EV ($000s/EV)
-
26.5
36.5
31.9
13.5
40.3
Panel (b): Employment and Battery Production Effects Relative to IRA Baseline (000s/year)
11.
∆US auto manufacturing jobs
-
-12.3
-14.5
0.7
-3.5
0.7
12.
∆US auto parts jobs
-
-7.8
-9.3
0.5
-2.3
0.5
13.
∆US auto assembly jobs
-
-4.5
-5.2
0.2
-1.2
0.2
14.
∆US-assembled EV batteries
-
-258
-289
11
-34
19
15.
Cost per additional US job ($000s/job)
-
563
169
-2,160
-499
877
Panel (c): Surplus Effects Relative to IRA Baseline ($billion/year)
16.
∆US consumer surplus
-
-4.84
-0.88
-1.08
2.33
0.67
17.
∆Global producer surplus
-
-1.63
-1.37
0.10
-0.05
0.08
18.
∆US producer surplus
-
-2.56
-3.67
0.35
-0.95
0.28
19.
∆Foreign producer surplus
-
0.93
2.30
-0.25
0.90
-0.20
20.
∆CO2 emissions (million tons/year)
-
5.74
3.03
0.51
-2.14
-0.50
21.
∆Global neg. exter. (global SCC)
-
1.47
0.89
0.11
-0.55
-0.13
22.
∆US neg. exter. (domestic SCC)
-
0.25
0.24
0.00
-0.10
-0.02
23.
∆Foreign neg. exter. (foreign SCC)
-
1.22
0.65
0.11
-0.46
-0.11
24.
∆US government spending
-
-6.90
-2.45
-1.61
1.74
0.60
25.
∆Global surplus
-
-1.04
-0.69
0.52
1.09
0.28
26.
∆US total surplus (global SCC)
-
-1.97
-2.99
0.77
0.19
0.48
27.
∆US total surplus (domestic SCC)
-
-0.74
-2.35
0.88
-0.27
0.37
28.
∆Foreign total surplus (foreign SCC)
-
-0.30
1.66
-0.36
1.36
-0.09
Panel (d): Welfare Cost per Ton of CO2 Abated
29.
US cost/ton CO2 abated ($/ton)
-
-101
-747
1,759
152
-719
30.
Global cost/ton CO2 abated ($/ton)
-
59.8
13.8
1,269
-268
-318
Continued on next page
49


===== [PAGE 52] =====

Table 7 (continued from previous page)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Repeal IRA
Modify Trade Limits
IRA
(baseline)
Eliminate
EV
Credits
Return to
Pre-IRA
30D with
phaseout
IRA, add
trade re-
strictions
on leases
IRA,
remove
trade re-
strictions
IRA,
remove
income
threshold
Panel (e): MVPF of Higher-Spending versus Lower-Spending Scenario
31.
Global MVPF
-
1.15
1.28
0.68
1.63
1.46
32.
US MVPF (global SCC)
-
1.28
2.22
0.52
1.11
1.79
33.
US MVPF (domestic SCC)
-
1.11
1.96
0.45
0.85
1.61
Panel (f): Allocation of EV Credits
34.
Share of EVs with credits (%)
79.7
0.00
65.9
66.8
87.8
86.8
35.
Among HHs >$300k (%)
44.0
0.00
64.8
23.0
41.5
78.7
Notes: This table presents counterfactual simulation results for the IRA and alternative policies. In column 2, all 30D and
45W credits are set to zero. In column 3, we simulate EV credits as they would have been in July-August 2023 had the IRA
not passed. Under the pre-IRA Section 30D, all EVs (purchased or leased) are eligible for credits until the 200,000-vehicle
cap. Given cumulative sales volumes through mid-2023, we assume no credit for Chevrolet and Tesla, 1/4 credit for Toyota
and Ford, 1/2 credit for BMW and Stellantis. In column 4, we apply the Section 30D trade restrictions to all leases, although
the buyer income restrictions still do not apply to leases. In column 5, all vehicles are eligible under Section 30D regardless
of assembly location or battery sourcing, although buyer income restrictions and MSRP caps still apply. In column 6, we
remove the $300,000 income restriction on purchases. New vehicle registrations include only leases and purchases by individ-
uals, not vehicles sold to organizations. “US firms” denotes vehicles produced by US-owned firms, including the traditional
US brands in Stellantis. “US assembly” denotes vehicles assembled in the US, regardless of firm ownership. Rows with ∆
refer to changes relative to the IRA baseline. “Global surplus” equals the sum of consumer surplus, US producer surplus
and foreign producer surplus less government spending and negative externalities. “US total surplus” equals global surplus
minus foreign automakers’ producer surplus. “Foreign SCC” is global SCC minus domestic SCC. Costs of abatement are in
terms of social welfare; they are negative when a policy change results in lower carbon emissions and increased social welfare
disregarding the direct effect of carbon damages. Cost per additional EV is the ratio of ∆government spending to ∆new
EVs registered relative to the IRA. Cost per additional US job is the ratio of ∆government spending to ∆US manufactur-
ing job relative to the IRA. The marginal value of public funds (MVPF) equals (∆consumer surplus + ∆producer surplus
- ∆negative externalities)/(∆government spending). The “US MVPF” values are computed with ∆US producer surplus
in the numerator, while the “Global MVPF” uses ∆global producer surplus in the numerator.
50


===== [PAGE 53] =====

Table 8: Counterfactual Simulation Results: Optimal Subsidies
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
IRA
US-optimal
uniform EV
subsidy, 30D
restrictions
US-optimal
uniform EV
subsidy, 30D
restrictions,
valuing jobs
US-optimal
differentiated
EV subsidy.
30D
restrictions
Panel (a): Market Aggregates under Counterfactual Scenario
1.
Mean EV subsidy in this counterfactual
$7,314
$9,606
$10,111
$11,928
2.
(Standard deviation)
(815)
(0)
(0)
(3,279)
3.
Vehicle registrations (000s/year)
10,633
10,672
10,684
10,702
4.
EV registrations (000s/year)
1,184
1,291
1,317
1,347
5.
US firms
835
1,028
1,058
1,127
6.
Foreign firms
349
263
259
220
7.
EV market share (%)
11.1
12.1
12.3
12.6
8.
Lease share, within EVs (%)
29.3
11.1
11.2
8.9
9.
US assembly share, within EVs (%)
70.5
77.8
78.5
79.7
Panel (b): Surplus Effects Relative to No EV Subsidy Baseline ($billion/year)
10.
∆US consumer surplus
4.84
7.36
7.89
8.23
11.
∆Global producer surplus
1.63
2.43
2.61
4.30
12.
∆US producer surplus
2.56
4.61
4.91
6.97
13.
∆Foreign producer surplus
-0.93
-2.17
-2.30
-2.66
14.
∆Global neg. externalities (global SCC)
-1.47
-1.79
-1.92
-3.32
15.
∆US neg. externalities (domestic SCC)
-0.25
-0.20
-0.21
-0.93
16.
∆Foreign neg. externalities (foreign SCC)
-1.22
-1.59
-1.71
-2.39
17.
∆US government spending
6.90
10.0
10.9
13.3
18.
∆Global surplus
1.04
1.54
1.52
2.55
19.
∆US total surplus (global SCC)
1.97
3.71
3.82
5.22
20.
∆US total surplus (domestic SCC)
0.74
2.12
2.11
2.83
21.
∆Foreign total surplus (foreign SCC)
0.30
-0.58
-0.59
-0.27
Panel (c): Impacts on CO2
22.
∆CO2 emissions (million tons/year)
-5.74
-7.47
-8.01
-11.2
23.
Global cost/ton CO2 abated ($/ton)
59.8
35.2
51.9
13.2
24.
US cost/ton CO2 abated ($/ton)
-101
-255
-235
-225
Panel (d): MVPF versus No EV Subsidy
25.
Global MVPF
1.15
1.15
1.14
1.19
26.
US MVPF (global SCC)
1.28
1.37
1.35
1.39
27.
US MVPF (domestic SCC)
1.11
1.21
1.19
1.21
28.
Cost per additional EV ($000s/EV)
26.5
27.4
27.7
31.4
29
∆US auto manufacturing jobs (000s)
12.3
22.4
23.9
21.2
30.
Cost per additional US job ($000s/job)
563
449
457
628
Notes: This table presents counterfactual simulation results for the IRA and alternative policies, relative to a common baseline
of no EV subsidies (column 2 in Table 7). In column 2, we simulate the uniform EV subsidy, subject to Section 30D trade
restrictions, that maximizes US total surplus with the domestic SCC. In column 3, we assume the planner values annual US
jobs as $10,700 per job.
In column 4, we simulate the choice-specific differentiated EV subsidy that maxiumizes US total
surplus with the domestic SCC. New vehicle registrations include only leases and purchases by individuals, not vehicles sold to
organizations. Mean and standard deviation of subsidies are sales-weighted across EV models conditional on positive 30D or
45W credit amount, accounting in column 1 for income-eligibility using the model-implied income distribution. The marginal
value of public funds (MVPF) equals (∆consumer surplus + ∆producer surplus - ∆negative externalities)/(∆government
spending). The “US MVPF” values are computed with ∆US producer surplus in the numerator, while the “Global MVPF”
uses ∆global producer surplus in the numerator. “US total surplus” equals “[global] total surplus” minus foreign automakers’
producer surplus. Costs of abatement are negative when a policy change results in lower carbon emissions but is welfare-positive
even when disregarding carbon damages. Cost per additional EV is the ratio of ∆government spending to ∆new EVs registered.
51


===== [PAGE 54] =====

Figure 1: Section 30D Purchase Credit Eligibility
Eligibility group
Models
Pre-IRA
8/17/22 - 12/31/22
1/1/23 - 4/17/23
4/18/23 - Late 2023
Exclude if sales >
200k
Exclude if assembled
outside North
America
Re-include if sales >
200k; exclude if
MSRP > $55k/$80k
Exclude foreign
battery
minerals/components
Excluded Aug 2022
Audi (Q4 e-tron, Q8 e-tron); BMW (i4, iX); Hyundai
(Ioniq 5, Kona); Kia (EV6, Niro); Lexus (NX PHEV);
Mercedes-Benz (EQB); Nissan (ARIYA); Polestar
(Polestar 2); Porsche (Taycan); Subaru (Solterra);
Toyota (RAV4 PHEV, bZ4X); Volvo (C40, XC40, XC60
PHEV, XC90 PHEV)
$7,500
BMW (530e PHEV); Kia (Sorento PHEV, Sportage
PHEV); Toyota (Prius PHEV)
$3,750 - $7,500
Included Jan 2023
Chevrolet (Bolt, Bolt EUV); Tesla (Model 3, Model Y)
$7,500
Excluded/reduced
Apr 2023
Ford (E-Transit, Mustang Mach-E); Jeep (Grand
Cherokee PHEV, Wrangler PHEV); Rivian (R1S, R1T)
$7,500
$3,750
Ford (Escape PHEV)
$3,750 - $7,500
$3,750
Audi (Q5 PHEV); BMW (X5 PHEV); Nissan (Leaf)
$7,500
Excluded Jan 2023
Lucid (Air); Mercedes-Benz (EQS)
$7,500
Always included
Chrysler (Pacifica PHEV); Ford (F-150 Lightning);
Volkswagen (ID.4)
$7,500
Always excluded
Tesla (Model S, Model X)
Notes: This figure shows which models are eligible for the IRA Section 30D purchase credit by time period.
The figure includes models averaging more than 300 sales per month in 2022 and 2023. The shading intensity
indicates the credit amount that the model is eligible for. The red, blue, and orange colors indicate eligibility
changes that we study in Section 5 below. This figure is inspired by Figure 3 of Buckberg (2023). The final
column header says “late 2023” because several vehicles were retroactively made eligible in late 2023, and
the Tesla Model X became eligible in late 2023 as its MSRP decreased.
52


===== [PAGE 55] =====

Figure 2: Electric Vehicle Supply Constraints
(a) Average Days-to-Turn (Not Including Tesla)
20
30
40
50
60
70
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
Average days−to−turn
Electric vehicles
Gasoline  vehicles
(b) Tesla Estimated Wait Times
0
50
100
150
200
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
Estimated wait time (days)
Notes: Panel (a) presents a fixed-weight index of average days-to-turn, i.e., the average time that vehicles
sold in that month were available in the dealership’s inventory before being sold from Edmunds (2024). The
Edmunds data exclude Tesla. Panel (b) presents a fixed-weight index of average delivery wait time reported
on the Tesla website (Tesla 2023; Pritchard 2023; The Internet Archive 2023). Both panels present indexes
constructed by computing the January 2023 weighted average (weighting models by average monthly sales
in months when the model was available), and then recursively adding the sales-weighted average change for
all models available in each previous or subsequent month.
53


===== [PAGE 56] =====

Figure 3: Distribution of Negative Externalities Across Submodels
(a) Global SCC
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
10
20
30
40
Total negative externalities ($000s)
Share of registrations by powertrain
Vehicle type
Electric
Gasoline
(b) Domestic SCC
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
55%
−5
0
5
10
15
Total negative externalities ($000s)
Share of registrations by powertrain
Vehicle type
Electric
Gasoline
Notes: This figure shows the distribution of total negative externalities across submodels, weighting sub-
models by registrations in July and August 2023. Carbon damages are evaluated at the global SCC of $241
in panel (a), and at the domestic SCC of $28 in panel (b).
54


===== [PAGE 57] =====

Figure 4: Relative Lease Price Trends Associated with Eligibility Changes
(a) Trends by Eligibility Group
−14
−12
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
Lease price minus purchase price ($000s)
Eligibility
Excluded Aug 2022
Included Jan 2023
Other EVs
Gasoline vehicles
(b) Event Study Estimates
Months after Jan 2023
Lease price minus purchase price ($000s)
−10
−5
0
5
−5
0
5
10
Excluded Aug 2022
Months after Jan 2023
Lease price minus purchase price ($000s)
−10
−5
0
5
−5
0
5
10
Included Jan 2023
Other EVs
Months after Jan 2023
Lease price minus purchase price ($000s)
−10
−5
0
5
−5
0
5
10
Other EVs
Notes: Panel (a) presents lease price minus purchase price indexes constructed by computing the January
2023 weighted averages for each eligibility group and then recursively adding the sales-weighted average
changes for all submodels available in each previous or subsequent month. Panel (b) presents the γe
r coef-
ficients and 95 percent confidence intervals from equation (2). Eligibility groups are described in Figure 1;
the Other EVs group includes all EVs not part of either the Excluded August 2023 or the Included January
2023 groups. In both panels, we weight submodels by average monthly sales in months when the submodel
was available.
55


===== [PAGE 58] =====

Figure 5: Lease Share Trends Associated with Eligibility Changes
(a) Trends by Eligibility Group
20
40
60
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
Lease share (%)
Eligibility
Excluded Aug 2022
Included Jan 2023
Other EVs
Gasoline vehicles
(b) Event Study Estimates
Months after Jan 2023
Lease share (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
−5
0
5
10
Excluded Aug 2022
Months after Jan 2023
Lease share (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
−5
0
5
10
Included Jan 2023
Months after Jan 2023
Lease share (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
−5
0
5
10
Other EVs
Notes: Panel (a) presents lease share indexes constructed by computing the January 2023 weighted averages
for each eligibility group and then recursively adding the sales-weighted average changes for all submodels
available in each previous or subsequent month.
Panel (b) presents the γe
r coefficients and 95 percent
confidence intervals from equation (2). Eligibility groups are described in Figure 1; the Other EVs group
includes all EVs not part of either the Excluded August 2023 or the Included January 2023 groups. In both
panels, we weight submodels by average monthly sales in months when the submodel was available.
56


===== [PAGE 59] =====

Figure 6: Heat Map of Second Choices by Vehicle Class
EV Minivan
EV Pickup
EV Sedan
EV SUV/CUV
GV Convertible/Coupe
GV Minivan
GV Pickup
GV Sedan
GV SUV/CUV
EV Minivan
EV Pickup
EV Sedan
EV SUV/CUV
GV Convertible/Coupe
GV Minivan
GV Pickup
GV Sedan
GV SUV/CUV
First choice vehicle class
Second choice vehicle class
NVES
EV Minivan
EV Pickup
EV Sedan
EV SUV/CUV
GV Convertible/Coupe
GV Minivan
GV Pickup
GV Sedan
GV SUV/CUV
EV Minivan
EV Pickup
EV Sedan
EV SUV/CUV
GV Convertible/Coupe
GV Minivan
GV Pickup
GV Sedan
GV SUV/CUV
First choice vehicle class
Second choice vehicle class
Model−implied
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Notes: This figure presents the conditional shares of vehicle class × powertrain second choices; the left panel
shows these second choice probabilities from the NVES data, while the right panel shows the model-implied
shares. The fact that 0 percent of EV Minivan buyers in the NVES select another EV Minivan as a second
choice arises because the NVES aggregates all trims of the Chrysler Pacifica PHEV (the only electric minivan
available) with their gasoline counterparts for the second choice survey. Since the minivan segment is a small
share of vehicle sales overall, this minimally changes our model fit statistics.
57


===== [PAGE 60] =====

Figure 7: Distribution of Social Marginal Cost Minus Price Across Submodels
(a) Global SCC
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
0
10
20
30
Social marginal cost − price ($000s)
Share of registrations by powertrain
Vehicle type
Electric
Gasoline
(b) Domestic SCC
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
−10
−5
0
5
10
Social marginal cost − price ($000s)
Share of registrations by powertrain
Vehicle type
Electric
Gasoline
Notes: This figure shows the distribution across submodels (both purchased and leased) of social marginal
cost minus price, weighting submodels by registrations in July and August 2023. Social marginal cost is the
inferred marginal production cost cj plus negative externality ϕj; panel (a) computes negative externalities
at the global SCC, whereas panel (b) computes negative externalities at the domestic SCC. Price is the
unsubsidized market price pj.
58


===== [PAGE 61] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”:
Electric Vehicles and the Inflation Reduction Act
Hunt Allcott
Reigner Kane
Maximilian S. Maydanchik
Joseph S. Shapiro
Felix Tintelnot
Table of Contents
A
Data Appendix
60
A.1 Panel Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.2 Externalities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.3 Dealership Inventory Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.4 Employment Intensity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B
Descriptive Facts Appendix
66
B.1
Texas Registration Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
C
Event Study Appendix
67
C.1
Event Study Regression Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
C.2
Doubly-Robust Event Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
C.3
Event Studies with Registration Quantities and Purchase Prices . . . . . . . . . . .
67
D
Equilibrium Model
71
D.1 Quantity Demanded and Consumer Surplus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
D.2 Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
D.3 Computation of Standard Errors and Confidence Intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
D.4 Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
D.5 Impacts of IRA on Investment and Other Outcomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
E
Analytical Model Appendix
79
E.1
First-Best . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
E.2
Constrained Optimal Differentiated Subsidy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
E.3
Constrained Optimal Uniform Subsidy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
59


===== [PAGE 62] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
A
Data Appendix
A.1
Panel Construction
Our core panel dataset is comprised of data from Experian (quantities), Cox Automotive (lease
prices), and the California DMV (purchase prices), together with a collection of supplemental
sources.
The Experian data has complete national coverage of new vehicle sales, both purchases and
leases, aggregated to the monthly level. To clean these data, we first restrict to considering light-
duty vehicles, consider only vehicles purchased for personal use or leased, and exclude fuel cell
vehicles. Because vehicle quantities are reported at somewhat different levels of aggregation across
observations (e.g. combining similar trims some, but not all of the time), we aggregate to a “lowest
common denominator” definition of submodel, which is consistent across observations and across
time.
The Cox Automotive data has national coverage, but is not exhaustive as it depends on there
being a business relationship between Cox and the firms/dealerships. The dataset is at the transac-
tion level, which allows us to obtain VIN-level information (e.g. assembly location). Additionally,
Cox uniquely includes the details of lease contracts, surfacing down payments, monthly payment,
and duration. We clean these data by filtering out observations with implausible monthly payments
for the vehicles we consider (i.e., below $200 or above $1,500) and outlier lease durations (less than
12 months or more than 60 months).
The California DMV data has coverage only for California, and is provided in a sequence of
cross-sectional snapshots of currently-registered vehicles. The snapshots we use are from July 2023,
October 2023, and April 2024. The variables associated with a registration record include the prefix
of the vehicle identification number (VIN), self-reported price, vehicle make, series, model, model
year, date of the most recent registration, most recent odometer reading and reading date, year
and month of each ownership transfer, and an indicator for whether the vehicle is leased. The VIN
prefix is the first 11 digits, excluding the ninth (check digit). We obtain purchase prices from the
California DMV data, which combined with lease terms from the Cox data, allows us to compute
lease prices which are comparable to directly observed purchase prices.
We have also run our
analyses using purchase prices from Cox for observations where they are available (approximately
93 percent of registrations in our cross-section) and found similar results, which we do not include
in their entirety for the sake of brevity. For comparison, using Cox prices results in counterfactual
outcomes which are typically much closer to our baseline specification in column (1) of Appendix
Table A6 than any of the other robustness checks.
To transform this sequence of snapshots into a single panel, we employ the following algorithm.
First, we check the odometer reading; if it is less than or equal to 250 miles, we use the corresponding
odometer reading date as the initial registration date.39 For vehicles with odometer readings that
39In California, the primary registration form for new vehicles (Form REG-343) requires reporting the odometer
reading “upon date of purchase in California.”
60


===== [PAGE 63] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
are either missing or greater than 250 miles, we then check the latest registration date. Because we
observe the model year of the vehicle, we can check whether date is plausibly an initial registration
date (i.e., falls between July 1 of the year prior to the model year and April 1 of the year after the
model year). If it is, we use the most recent registration date as the initial registration date. If a
vehicle doesn’t satisfy our requirements for inferring initial registration date on the basis of odometer
or latest registration information, we assume we cannot identify the initial registration date for the
vehicle, and so drop it from our sample. In practice, 96 percent of initial registration dates in
our panel are derived from the first step, using odometer reading/reading date. The remaining
4 percent may be subject to some errors, as California’s requirement for annual re-registration of
a vehicle could confound successful identification of the initial registration date. For example, a
vehicle could be purchased in September of the year before its model year and be re-registered in
September of its model year; if this vehicle’s observation is also missing a valid odometer reading,
or if its ownership was transferred (and hence a new, higher odometer reading was recorded), it
would enter our panel as having been initially acquired in September of its model year. We check
that our findings are robust to using only the vehicles whose initial registration dates are inferred
from their odometer reading.
The main analysis sample makes two other exclusions. We exclude any observations with fewer
than 25 registrations. Additionally, we exclude any purchase or lease price observations based on
fewer than 10 transactions.
We construct fixed-weight price indices as follows. Define xkt as some variable for submodel k
in month t, define ¯qk as submodel mean monthly sales in the months when firms sell it, and define
t = 0 as January 2023. The fixed-weight index for in month t equals
¯xt =
P
k ¯qkxk0
P
k ¯qk
+ 1 (t > 0)
t
X
r=1
P
k ¯qk (xk,r −xk,r−1)
P
k ¯qk
+ 1 (t < 0)
t
X
r=−1
P
k ¯qk (xk,r −xk,r+1)
P
k ¯qk
.
As described in the text, xkt is missing for some kt, so the sums over k implicitly include only
non-missing observations. This prevents the computed series from displaying fluctuations entirely
driven by panel imbalance.
We check the trend of daily new registration over time based on two cross-sections. We find
a delay of roughly 45 days for all registration to appear in the DMV record; that is, the number
of observed registrations fall sharply relative to the trend within the 45 days prior to the date the
snapshot was taken. Given the possibility that later registrations overwrite earlier ones, we use the
earlier cross-section to approximate the initial registration date of earlier-registered vehicles. The
final dataset is constructed using the July 2023 cross-section for registrations between August 15,
2022 and April 30, 2023; the October 2023 cross-section for registrations between May 1 and August
30, 2023; and the April 2024 cross-section for registrations between September 1 and December 31,
2023.
In addition to these core data sources, we use the National Highway Traffic Safety Administra-
tion (NHTSA)’s VIN decoder to append information on powertrain type (e.g. GV vs. PHEV vs.
61


===== [PAGE 64] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
BEV) and assembly location. Further combining vehicle names and model years with eligibility
information from FuelEconomy.gov, we generate a submodel × month panel, with information on
number of monthly registrations (including purchases and leases separately) from Experian, ve-
hicle characteristics including powertrain and assembly location, average recorded purchase price
from the California DMV, average lease price and lease price minus purchase price from merging
Cox and California DMV data, and credit eligibility. This final merge is achieved by leveraging
the presence of VIN-prefix in both the California DMV and Cox datasets, and through a manual
crosswalk between vehicle names with Experian.
For Tesla price data, we augment the above panel using the following sources. From Tesla’s
website, via the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine, we obtain base configuration lease terms and
purchase prices for most months in our sample. For those which are inaccessible via the Wayback
Machine, we additionally collect price data from contemporaneous reporting courtesy (InsideEVs
2024) and the enthusiast-run project Tesla Car Price History (Bautista 2024). This allows us to
consistently compare lease prices and purchase prices for the base configuration of each model
across time.
Finally, we used new EV registration data from EV-Volumes to inform our dealership inventory
survey (Appendix A.3) and compute market shares to weight the resulting wait times. We also
used vehicle registration data from Texas to investigate the frequency of consumers exploiting the
“loophole within a loophole” as described in Appendix B.1. These registration data are not as
straightforward as those from California’s DMV to convert into a panel in part due to a lack of an
explicit lease flag, but do feature full vehicle VINs and addresses. These features allow us to track
changes in ownership over time, which is crucial for identifying lease buyouts.
For measuring credit eligibility, in the few instances of variation in eligibility within a submodel-
by-month, we assign maximal eligibility to all observed transactions. This affects a small number
of submodels, such as the BMW 330e (which was being assembled in both Mexico and Germany
for the US market in late 2022) and the Volkswagen ID.4 (which moved assembly to Tennessee in
late 2022, resulting in some model year 2022 German-assembled ID.4s being registered after the
IRA passed).
A.2
Externalities
This subsection provides additional detail on a few components of our estimates of each submodel’s
externalities.
CO2 and local air pollution emissions from driving. For EVs, we compute the damages
from generating electricity to charge the vehicles, using hourly-seasonalregional short-run marginal
emission rates from Holland et al. (2024). These estimates include emissions of CO2 and of SO2 and
NOx To aggregate across geographies to the national level, we average across ZIP codes within each
state, weighting by each ZIP’s total vehicle miles traveled, following Holland et al. (2016), and we
average across states weighting by each state’s powertrain-specific new vehicle sales in 2023. Since
EVs have higher market shares in states with cleaner electricity generation, the state-by-powertrain
62


===== [PAGE 65] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
weighting implies lower marginal damages from EVs than if we assumed that the marginal EVs
and GVs had the same sales everywhere.
As a sensitivity analysis, we also consider the impact of estimating carbon emissions from EV
charging using the long-run marginal CO2 emissions estimates from the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory’s Cambium “MidCase” scenario, averaged across the estimated values for 2025, 2030,
and 2035 (Gagnon et al. 2024). This results in a reduction in CO2 from charging of 60 percent
relative to our baseline numbers (comparing Table A1 to Table 2).
For GVs, we compute the harms from tailpipe emissions. We construct CO2 emissions using
each submodel’s fuel economy rating. We compute submodel-specific local pollution emission factors
from US EPA (2024) test data, using submodel-specific certified emission rates for the vehicle’s full
useful life as in Jacobsen et al. (2023), combined with regulatory standards.
Each submodel’s
emissions for each pollutant is computed as the average between the test value and regulatory
value. The regulatory standards are likely to over-estimate true emissions, as vehicles over-comply
to avoid recalls; the exhaust tests may under-estimate true on-road emissions, as emissions control
systems depreciate with age and auto manufacturers optimize vehicle design towards the emissions
control test; averaging the two provides a middle-ground. Using these emissions rates, we again
compute the weighted average marginal damage across ZIP codes using marginal damage estimates
for local pollutants from the AP3 integrated assessment model (Clay et al. 2019). We assume that
63 percent of PHEV miles traveled are on gasoline and 37 percent are on electricity, following Pl¨otz
et al. (2020).
We calculate the US SCC by taking the ratio of the US to global SCC in Ricke et al. (2018),
averaging across models and scenarios, then multiplied by our CPI-inflated global SCC value.
Accident externalities. Following Anderson and Auffhammer (2014), we estimate the ex-
pected increased mortality cost from accidents of each submodel relative to the lightest vehicle
available. The mortality cost is the product of the accident probability, the incremental death
probability from driving a heavier vehicle, and the value of a statistical life (VSL). Our estimate of
the accident probability comes from dividing the total number of vehicles involved in multi-vehicle
accidents by the number of unique vehicles on the road between 2004 and 2021. An alternative
calculation, which estimates the probability of a vehicle being in a multi-vehicle accident by a re-
gression of accident counts on registered vehicles, agrees empirically with the first approach when
we disregard the possibility of the same accident being in more than one multi-vehicle accidents over
its lifetime. We use the estimate obtained from the first method, 27 percent, and follow Anderson
and Auffhammer (2014) for the remainder of the calculation.
Positive fiscal externalities.
For EVs, we use the utility-specific markups on residential
electricity above private marginal cost calculated by Borenstein and Bushnell (2022), weighting
utilities within a state by sales and weighting states by new EV sales in 2023.
The resulting
weighted average markup is 12 cents per kWh.
For GVs, we use federal and state gas taxes,
weighting states by new GV sales in 2023. The resulting weighted average gas tax is 55 cents per
gallon. A submodel’s total positive fiscal externality depends on those markup or tax amounts and
63


===== [PAGE 66] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
the submodel’s electricity use or fuel economy.
A.3
Dealership Inventory Survey
Between July 7 and August 4, 2023, we conducted a survey targeting dealerships selling popular
EVs in a number of geographically diverse markets with relatively large EV adoption rates. We
collected responses from the West Coast (Los Angeles, San Diego, San Jose, and San Francisco),
East Coast (New York and Philadelphia), the Midwest (Minneapolis), and the South (Houston).
These are in addition to a brief pilot, whose results are unreported here, conducted in St. Louis in
early July prior to the other surveys.
We compiled a list, from EV-Volumes data, of the EV models that were most popular in 2022
and early 2023. Some vehicles were omitted due to having been discontinued by the time of our
survey, and others were omitted due to being largely or entirely sold direct-to-consumer (namely
Rivian and Tesla). RAs then searched for dealerships selling each make, and contacted them by
phone. For each model, they then asked
Hello, my name is
and I’m interested in purchasing a [model name]. I would
be paying cash for the vehicle. When would be a feasible delivery time for the vehicle?
How much should I expect to pay? How about delivery times for your other electric or
plug-in hybrid vehicles?
The RAs then recorded this information for each of the EV models which the dealership in question
sold. If the model was not in stock up to two more dealerships were contacted in the city; our
analysis is conducted on the minimum wait time across contacted dealerships in the city. Additional
information concerning the exact trim and sales price were recorded, though are not directly used
here; we did not observe systematic markups relative to MSRP. In total, we recorded wait times
for a total of 681dealership-model combinations.
For each dealership-model combination with non-zero wait time, we assign the midpoint of the
predicted window given as that dealership-model wait time. We then take the minimum of these
within cities to obtain a city-model dataset. These data are merged with EV-Volumes registration
records from July and August, and we compute the proportion of wait times that are zero days,
within 30 days, and within 60 days both weighted (by national market share) and unweighted.
A.4
Employment Intensity
To compute the domestic employment effects of vehicle production, we partition the automotive
production sector into two components: final assembly and parts.
Cuenca, Gaines, and Vyas
(1999) estimate that parts account for ∼80% of total costs and final assembly for ∼20.40 We then
40We considered obtaining these statistics from input-output tables but chose not to for a few reasons. Specifically,
we examined the cost structure of the automobile manufacturing industry (NAICS code 336111) in the 2017 Use
table after redefinitions at producer prices from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The partition of intermediate
goods into “automotive parts’” and other industries in the Use table is likely prone to measurement error. The
64


===== [PAGE 67] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
compute number of US workers in the final assembly and parts manufacturing according to the
following formulas:
la
j = cj × USa
j × 0.2 × ra
wa
and lp
j =
cj × NAp
j × 0.8 × rp
wp
Using these values, we calculate the following baseline aggregates:
La = 6 ×
X
j
Rjla
j ≈103, 000 and Lp = 6 ×
X
j
Rjlp
j ≈236, 000
Here la
j and lp
j represent the per-vehicle number of US workers associated with the production of
submodel j in the assembly and parts industries, respectively. From our model, we take submodel-
specific estimates of per-vehicle production costs cj. We use ancillary data on the share USa
j of
submodel j assembled in the US, and the share NAp
j of submodel j parts from the US or Canada.
For assembly, we calculate the ratio of payroll to value added ra for assembly, and the ratio of
payroll to output rp for parts.
We divide these by the mean wages wa and wp of workers in
the assembly and parts industries, respectively. To calculate the baseline aggregates, we use data
on registrations Rj of each submodel in our two-month panel.
We use the share of payroll in
value added in the assembly industry since we interpret the 20 percent share as representing the
value added from the final assembly process beyond the value of the input parts, abstracting from
intermediates besides auto parts. We use the share of payroll in output for the parts industry since
the 80 percent share is from the perspective of the final assembler, while expenditures on parts are
revenue from the perspective of firms in the parts industry. The aggregate employment figures are
calculated analogously across the counterfactual scenarios we consider, and we then compute the
change in employment in each industry relative to the baseline under the IRA.
The aggregate employment figures produced by summing up our employment measures (that
is, La and Lp) differ from industry-wide aggregates for a few reasons; the BLS reports employment
of 254,000 and 618,000, respectively, in the final assembly and parts industries. First, our construc-
tion captures only employment associated with vehicles which are purchased or leased domestically.
for this reason, final vehicles which are exported (accounting for approximately 15 percent of pro-
duction according to total production as reported by International Organization of Motor Vehicle
Manufacturers (2023) and exports reported by US International Trade Administration (2025) and
parts which are exported for assembly into vehicles purchased outside of the US are counted in
simple aggregate employment figures but are intentionally excluded from our calculations. Within
the parts industry specifically, some portion of the industry’s output is used for purposes other
than producing new vehicles (e.g. replacement and aftermarket parts). Additionally, our registra-
tion data cover only a subset of the overall light-duty vehicle market; while we capture the vast
auto parts industry (4-digit NAICS code 3363) accounts for over half of all intermediate goods that the automobile
manufacturing industry purchases. The largest other suppliers of intermediate goods to auto manufacturing industries
include retail, wholesale, engines, glassware, unspecified machinery, etc., and other industries that are likely supplying
auto parts. Additionally, the Use table does not distinguish EV versus GV manufacturing, and EV manufacturing
was even less common in 2017.
65


===== [PAGE 68] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
majority (over 80 percent) of non-commercial light-duty registrations (our panel, once annualized
by multiplying by six, counts 10.74 million registrations as compared to the true value of 12.95
million), there are an additional 2.5 million fleet sales which we exclude from our analysis (Na-
tional Automobile Dealers Association 2023). Finally, we suspect that the fleet vehicles may be
disproportionately US-made, in which case our aggregate employment estimates would undershoot
relative to industry totals.
B
Descriptive Facts Appendix
B.1
Texas Registration Data Analysis
To examine the frequency with which EV buyers took advantage of the “loophole within a loophole”
(that is, first leasing a vehicle ineligible for the purchase credit, obtaining advantageous lease terms
due to the leasing loophole, then proceeding to buy out the lease), we combined two data sources
with VIN-level information. The first is Cox Automotive’s data on new vehicle transactions, which
allows us to identify VINs associated with leases. The second is Texas registration data, which
allows us to track the same VIN across time (as we can observe repeated registrations for the same
VIN). This is not possible using the California data, which is provided at the VIN-prefix level.
Because the California registration data lack the full VIN to identify a particular vehicle across
time, they do not let us identify lease buyouts in California. On the other hand, the Cox data alone
does not have information on re-registrations of vehicles or of lease buyouts directly. We also note
that, while the Texas market is not as large as California’s, it is the second largest in the country
and makes up a substantial share of the US market.
Combining the Cox and Texas registration data, we computed the early buyout rate in Texas
by filtering to vehicles which were recorded as leased in the Cox data and identifying vehicles that
were re-registered to a different address within three months of their initial registration. We use
the three month window given the comments dealerships conveyed about rapidly converting a lease
to a purchase for consumers who hoped to purchase a vehicle but obtain the lease subsidy. We use
re-registration as a proxy for buyouts, as leased vehicles appear to be almost exclusively recorded
as being initially registered to a leasing company; in our data, over 90% of leases are initially
registered to addresses with at least 100 leased vehicles over the time period. These addresses are
either out-of-state, P.O. boxes, or known addresses of leasing companies.
This analysis finds that levels of estimated early buyouts remained low among EVs and GVs
both before and after the new lease credit rules went into effect. In late 2022, EVs and GVs had
early buyout rates of around half a percent of leases. In early 2023 EVs had an early buyout rate
of around 1.4 percent. The estimated GV early buyout rate remained unchanged.
66


===== [PAGE 69] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
C
Event Study Appendix
C.1
Event Study Regression Tables
Table A2 presents the regression estimates used in the calibration of the empirical model in Section
6. Table A3 presents regression estimates documenting the lack of substantial price changes after
EVs lost eligibility in August 2022 and April 2023.
C.2
Doubly-Robust Event Studies
This appendix presents “doubly robust” estimates where the GV control group is reweighted to
match the EV pre-IRA average price. We compute weights with entropy balancing (Hainmueller
2012). This method computes weights such that the reweighted sample matches a set of target
moments, while maintaining maximal “closeness” (in an entropy sense) to a set of researcher-
defined initial weights. In our case, these initial weights are the monthly average registrations of
each GV, and the targeted moment will be average pre-IRA purchase price. Since EVs have a
higher average price, this will have the effect of upweighting more expensive GVs.
Because we can only compute new weights for GVs which are present in the pre-period sample,
we lose a little less than 5 percent of overall registrations after switching to these weights. To ensure
that the aggregate EV-GV balance is approximately the same between the primary specification
and this alternative specification, the entropy-balanced weights are normalized to sum to one, then
multiplied by the monthly average registrations across all GVs.
Appendix Figures A10–A12 present the reweighted event study estimates.
C.3
Event Studies with Registration Quantities and Purchase Prices
This appendix presents event studies of changes in purchase prices and in total registrations (in-
cluding both purchases and leases) around the 30D vehicle eligibility changes. Purchase prices are
discussed in more detail in Section 5.2, and so we focus here on interpreting results for quantities.
The IRA should affect total registrations in several ways. First, changes in vehicle eligibility for
Section 30D credits should shift demand among income-eligible consumers. Second, the January
2023 income eligibility restriction for Section 30D credits should reduce EV demand among con-
sumers who do not want to lease. Third, the January 2023 availability of EV lease credits under
45W should increase overall EV demand.
The fixed-weight purchase price indices in Panel (a) of Appendix Figure A13 suggest limited
changes in purchase prices coincident with credit eligibility.
The red and orange vertical lines
indicate the date of eligibility change for the eligibility group of the corresponding color from
Figure 1. For the vehicles that lost credit eligibility in August 2022, shown in red, prices change
relatively little in the several months before and after those vehicles lost eligibility in mid-August
2022, although prices drop more substantially in early 2023 as part of the price cuts described in
Figure A1. For the Excluded/Reduced April 2023 group in orange, prices also drop temporarily
67


===== [PAGE 70] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
in early 2023, but the index stays in the range of $63,000 to $65,000. For all other EVs in black,
which is mostly Tesla, prices drop by more than $10,000 between mid-2022 and the end of 2023.
The price trends in late 2022 may reflect supply conditions, while we interpret patterns in Spring
and Summer 2023 as less constrained.
The event study coefficients γe
s from equation (2) for each eligibility group in Panel (b) of
Appendix Figure A13 corroborate this finding, as they also suggest limited effects from 30D credit
eligibility changes on purchase prices. The confidence intervals rule out price drops of more than
$500 to $1,000 between September and December 2022 among the vehicles excluded from credit
eligibility in August 2022.
They also rule out price drops more than $2,000 among the group
of vehicles that lost or had decreased credit eligibility in April 2023. We do not consider event
studies for the groups that changed eligibility in January 2023 because those coincide with the
large Tesla-led price cuts, reflecting broader contemporaneous market trends. Regression estimates
that restrict the coefficients to be equal across the submodels that experienced an eligibility change
in August 2022 and April 2023 also suggest that prices did not substantially fall following these
eligibility changes. These estimates reject the hypothesis that prices dropped by more than $620
in the three months after losing eligibility versus the three months before; see Appendix Table A3.
Appendix Figure A14 presents the fixed-weight indexes and event study estimates. The figures
illustrate substantial market trends that predate, and are thus likely unrelated to, changes in EV
credit eligibility. The Excluded August 2022 group saw a significant registration decrease in July
and August 2022 (before they lost 30D eligibility), driven by decreases for Hyundai and Kia. The
Included January 2023 group saw a steady increase in 2022 and 2023 (before they regained 30D
eligibility), as Tesla demand grew steadily. The Excluded/Reduced April 2023 group saw decreases
in registrations in the first few months of 2023 (again, before they lost 30D eligibility).
Comparing against the final month before the eligibility change (month −1 on the x-axis), the
figures show no statistically detectable evidence of responses to credit eligibility. For the Excluded
August 2022 group, the 95 percent confidence intervals rule out registration decreases of more
than about 20 percent. For the Included January 2023 group, the confidence intervals rule out
registration increases of more than about 20-30 percent. For the Excluded/Reduced April 2023
group, the confidence intervals rule out registration decreases of more than about 20-30 percent in
the ensuing four months. However, especially given the evidence of other market trends before the
eligibility changes, we do not know what would have happened but for those eligibility changes.
Relative Lease Prices
Panel (a) of Figure 4 presents the fixed-weight indexes of relative lease price for the two groups
of EVs that changed eligibility, all other EVs, and all GVs. Relative lease price for GVs dropped
moderately in both 2022 and 2023. As the market weakened, relative lease prices for EVs also
decreased in the latter half of 2022. For the Excluded August 2022 group, lease prices decreased
more sharply in 2023. For the Included Jan 2023 group, relative lease prices increased temporarily
in December 2022, because Tesla cut purchase prices in that month but did not correspondingly
68


===== [PAGE 71] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
cut lease prices until the next month. The group’s relative lease prices were relatively flat in 2023
until Tesla started to offer a $7,500 lease rebate late in the year, and the blue line correspondingly
drops in November and December 2023. For all other EVs, relative lease prices also decrease more
than those of GVs over the course of 2023.
Panel (b) of Figure 4 presents the event study estimates. We define the “event” as the start
of 45W lease credits in January 2023. The patterns match Panel (a), except that they adjust for
the comparison to GVs, where relative lease prices also decreased. The left sub-panel shows that
for the Excluded August 2022 group compared to GVs, relative lease prices decreased by about
$5,000 compared to December 2022, and by about $7,000 relative to their level in July through
November 2022. The middle sub-panel shows that with the exception of the December 2022 blip,
the Included Jan 2023 group relative lease prices trended slightly upward relative to GVs during
2023 until the November 2023 Tesla lease price reduction. The right sub-panel shows that for all
other EVs, relative lease prices dropped by around $3,000 relative to GVs by the end of 2023.
Also notable is the heterogeneity in EV relative lease price changes across firms; see Appendix
Figure A8. By July-August 2023 relative to October-December 2022, Kia, Volvo, Volkswagen, and
Hyundai had dropped relative lease prices by about $7,500, Jeep, BMW, Toyota, and Ford had
dropped relative lease prices by about $1,000 to $4,000, and Tesla and GM had not reduced relative
lease prices.
While the Excluded August 2022 group’s relative lease price decrease in 2023 is consistent with
substantial or full pass-through of the $7,500 lease credit, two other results are not. First, while
Tesla eventually offered lease rebates, the Tesla and GM relative lease price decreased by much
less than $7,500, and the decrease only occurred after an 11-month delay. Second, the Excluded
August 2022 group’s relative lease price did not increase in late 2022 after losing eligibility. An
industry insider suggested a possible explanation—the IRA might have caused a change in economic
incidence. Perhaps the lease credit was not passed through before the IRA, but media coverage of
tax credits and the leasing loophole could have raised the salience of leasing and the tax credit,
inducing firms to compete harder for leases.
Comparison to Model
The equilibrium model does not target the observed pass-through of credits to prices from Section
5, but the simulated pass-through in the model following the removal of all EV credits indicates
that they are reasonably aligned. First, as a comparison to the purchase price patterns in Figure
A13 Panel (b), we look at pass-through of credits to purchase prices. Among EVs that previously
had credits, the model indicates that purchase prices fall by only $476 on average, suggesting that
the incidence of the purchase credits mostly falls on consumers, consistent with our descriptive
findings. Second, as a comparison to the lease price patterns in Figure 4 Panel (b, left), we look
at pass-through of credits to lease prices (relative to purchase prices). Among EVs in the same
Excluded August 2022 group, the model indicates more than complete pass-through of $8,022 to
consumers, overshifting by 7.5 percent above the $7,500 amount. The fact that our model is able to
69


===== [PAGE 72] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
generate overshifting is a consequence of the consumer heterogeneity in our model, which leads to
more flexible demand curvature (Miravete, Seim, and Thurk 2023). Of course the regressions and
model could differ for many reasons, most notably supply chain conditions in the pre-IRA period.
70


===== [PAGE 73] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
D
Equilibrium Model
D.1
Quantity Demanded and Consumer Surplus
There are M consumers in the market indexed by i. We define consumer types h(i) with repre-
sentative income yh(i), with a continuum of consumers receiving indirect utility from choice j with
price pj and demand subsidy, if income-eligible, τh(i)j equal to
Uih(i)j = ξj −αh(i)
 pj −τh(i)j

+ β
′
h(i)Xj + ϵij
where ξj is a common consumption utility common to all consumers and ϵij is an idiosyncratic
preference unique to each consumer distributed type-1 extreme value (mean zero and unit scale).
In the nested logit, each ϵij draw is independent across individuals but, for a given individual, is
correlated across nests as in equation (4). We normalize the common part of utility of the outside
option to zero, so Ui0 = ϵi0. Consumers have heterogeneous price sensitivities and preferences for
specific vehicle attributes in Xj across types according to αh(i) and β
′
h(i). Specifically,
αh(i) = exp(α0 + αyyh(i))
β
′
h(i)Xj = (β0 × 1j{Inside good} + βEV × 1j{EV} + βLease × 1j{Lease}) × yh(i)
Integrating over consumers of a given type h, the market share of choice j is
sh
j =
Z
1{Uihj ≥max
k∈J Uihk}dF(ϵi)
To express the market shares of each choice under the nested logit assumption for F(·), it is useful
to first define the following inclusive values, which represent the expected utility of a choice within
a nest conditional on selecting that nest
Ih
k = (1 −σk) ln
X
j∈Jk
exp
 
ξj −αh (pj −τhj) + β
′
hXj
1 −σk
!
Ih
c = (1 −σc) ln
X
k∈Kc
exp

Ih
k
1 −σc

(13)
Ih
g = (1 −σg) ln
X
c∈Cg
exp

Ih
c
1 −σg

Ih = ln

1 +
X
g∈EV,GV
exp Ih
g


In the above notation, J is the set of (1359) options available to purchase or lease, plus the
outside option; Jk is the partition of J corresponding to submodel k in the set of (759) submodels
K, plus the outside option; Kc is the partition of K corresponding to class c in the set of (9) classes
71


===== [PAGE 74] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
C, plus the outside option; and Cg is the partition of C corresponding to powertrain g ∈{EV,GV},
plus the outside option. Our normalization of the mean outside option value to zero and placement
of the outside option in a nest all by itself implies that in each of the first three lines, Ih0 = 0. This
is the source of the 1 in the final inclusive value.
Then, unconditional choice probabilities for j are given by the product of conditional probabili-
ties within a nest and the overall choice probability of powertrain, g, which can in turn be expressed
in terms of the inclusive values above:
sh
j = sh
j|k(j) × sh
k(j)|c(j) × sh
c(j)|g(j) × sh
g(j)
(14)
=
exp

ξj−αh(pj−τhj)+β
′
hXj
1−σk

exp

Ih
k(j)
1−σk

×
exp

Ih
k(j)
1−σc

exp

Ih
c(j)
1−σc
 ×
exp

Ih
c(j)
1−σg

exp

Ih
g(j)
1−σg
 ×
exp Ih
g(j)
exp Ih
McFadden (1978) provides a full derivation given the joint CDF of ϵij.
Total registrations
come from aggregating these within-type market shares, given each type is a share wh of the total
population of M consumers
qj = M
X
h
whsh
j
The substitution between any two choices,j and r, given by ∂qj
∂pr in equation (6), can be derived
using equations (13) and (14).
In the nested logit extension to the Small and Rosen (1981) log-sum consumer surplus formula,
total consumer surplus is given by
CS =
X
h
wh
Ih
αh
(15)
D.2
Estimation
The demand side parameters are estimated using a nested fixed-point approach: the outer loop
uses a gradient-based optimization over the eight structural parameters α = {α0, αy}, β =
{β0, βEV , βLease}, and σ =

σk, σc, σg	
to match our eight data moments while the inner loop
solves for ξ using the Berry (1994) contraction mapping to match observed market shares. The
contraction mapping is adapted to the nested logit using Grigolon and Verboven (2014), who show
that the contraction at each iteration (t) must be dampened by 1 −max

σk, σc, σg	
ξ(t+1)
j
←[ ξ(t)
j
+

1 −max
n
σk, σc, σgo 
log sobs
j
−log s(t)
j

(16)
where sobs
j
are observed market shares in the data and s(t)
j
are implied market shares in the
model given prices and the current values of outer loop parameters and ξ(t)
j . In the outer loop, we
minimize the L2-norm between our model moments, mn(α, β, σ), and our estimated data moments,
72


===== [PAGE 75] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
ˆmn, n = 1, ..., 8
(ˆα, ˆβ, ˆσ) = arg min Q(α, β, σ) =
sX
n
(mn(α, β, σ) −ˆmn)2
(17)
The eight moments we match are (1) a market share-weighted model-level own-price demand
elasticity, (2) the change in lease shares from a simulated increase in lease prices for the subset of
vehicles excluded from credits in August 2022, (3) the share of EV owners who choose another EV
as a second choice if their first choice was unavailable, (4) the share of EV owners who would choose
another EV in the same vehicle segment as their first choice if their first choice was unavailable, (5)
the difference in average transaction price for high- and low-income households, (6) the difference in
EV choice shares for high- and low-income households, (7) the difference in lease choice shares for
high- and low-income households, and (8) the ratio of inside choice shares for high- to low-income
households. Since we have as many moments as parameters to estimate, we match the targeted
moments exactly.
The values of each data moment and their source is present in Table 4. For the own-price
elasticity, since our model is at the level of a submodel-by-purchase option while the data elasticity
moment is aggregated to the model-level, we simulate the model-level elasticity by raising and
lowering prices by 0.5 percent and taking the average percent change in registrations as a central
difference approximation. We do this for every model and take a registration-weighted average.
For simulating the lease share change, we raise the price of the purchase options for the August
2022 excluded group and calculate the new choice probabilities for each option.
We compute
the change in the share of registrations for each submodel that are leases and then compare the
registration-weighted average change in lease shares across submodels.
To calculate the second choice moments in the model, we simulate removing each submodel k
from the choice set and compute the new choice probabilities for all remaining products. Define
sr\k as the market share of submodel r when k is unavailable. The second choice share is defined
by the ratio
sr\k −sr
sk
(18)
since any new registrations of r when k is no longer available must be from consumers who
originally had k but then had r as their next best option. The NVES only surveys consumers who
registered a new vehicle and we can only compute second choice shares among respondents who
provided one, so in practice we actually compute sr\k,0 for r, k = 1, ..., K, where \k, 0 removes k
and the outside option from the choice set.41 The share of EV consumers whose second choice is
also an EV is then given by
DEV →EV =
P
k∈EV sk\0
 P
r∈EV sr\k,0

P
k∈EV sk\0
(19)
41The proportional substitution in the nested logit to the outside option implies sk\0 = sk/(1 −s0). Over half of
respondents (58.5 percent) did not consider a second choice.
73


===== [PAGE 76] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Similarly, the own-class share among EV owners is given by a weighted average across classes,
c, within EVs:
DEV −class→EV −class =
P
c∈EV sc\0
 P
k∈c sk\0(
P
r∈c sr\k,0)
P
k∈c sk\0

P
c∈EV sc\0
(20)
The differences in transaction prices, lease propensity, EV propensity, and the inside choice ratio
for high- versus low-income households are computed by calculating the type-specific values and
aggregating over types according to their share of the total vehicle market. To compute the inside
choice share in the survey data, we combine the NVES data with information about the population
distribution from the IRS SOI. Using the provided survey weights, which are meant to reflect the
composition of the overall new vehicle market, we compute aggregate vehicle sales among high- and
low-income households in the NVES and divide that number by the count of households in the IRS
SOI data. This gives us an estimate of the average number of vehicles acquired per household. The
ratio of that statistic between households above and below $300,000 of reported income measures
differences in inside choice propensities.
While we only target the overall difference between high- and low-income households, Figure 6
reports that we closely match overall patterns across the full income distribution.
Estimation of the supply side consists of inverting the Nash-Bertrand first-order condition in
equation (8). In particular, stacking the system of J equations gives the markup equation
µ = −˜Ω
−1q
(21)
where µ is a J-vector of markups, µj = pj −cj + κj and ˜Ω= Ω⊙H is the matrix of demand
derivatives multiplied (Hadamard product) by the firm ownership matrix. That is, if f(j) returns
the identity of the firm that produces j, then each j, r element is given by
h
˜Ωjr
i
= ∂qr
∂pj × 1f(r)=f(j).
Given, the estimated demand parameters, we can compute ˜Ωand q to back out markups and—given
prices and subsidies—marginal costs.
To compute alternative price equilibria in our counterfactuals that change the policy vectors
τ and κ, we take our estimated marginal costs and demand parameters as given and then follow
the standard approach found in Morrow and Skerlos (2011) to solve a fixed-point problem closely
related to equation (21).
The solution to that equation coincides at an equilibrium point.
As
discussed in Section 6, there is no guarantee that the pricing equilibrium will be unique, but we
do not encounter multiple equilibria in practice. Figure A17 presents the distribution of implied
marginal costs in the first panel, and the distribution of equilibrium markups under a counterfactual
policy environment with no EV subsidies.
D.3
Computation of Standard Errors and Confidence Intervals
We compute the asymptotic variance of our model parameters using the delta method. Call θ ∈RP
the P-vector of model parameters to estimate. The model-implied moments, m(θ; z) are a function
74


===== [PAGE 77] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
of these parameters and other data inputs, z ∈RZ. In our main specification, P = 8 and Z = 1.42
Given estimates of data moments, m, to target, denote the full set of data inputs d = (z, m). Our
minimum-distance estimator is
Q(θ) = ∥g(θ; d)∥2,
g(θ; d) ≡m(θ; z) −m
First, we will derive the covariance of the distance metric at a known θ. To make this explicit,
define this function by h(d) ≡g(θ; d). The Jacobian of h(d) with respect to the data moments, d,
is
Jd =
h
Jz
−IP
i
where Jz = ∂h(d)/∂z and IP is the identity matrix of dimension P. Let the joint covariance of
the estimators for the data moments be
Σd =
"
Σzz
Σzm
Σmz
Σmm
#
Then, by the delta method, the asymptotic distribution of h(d) is
√n

g(θ; ˆd) −g(θ; d0)

= √n

h( ˆd) −h(d0)

= d→N(0, JdΣdJ
′
d
| {z }
Sg
)
Expanding the block product gives the covariance of the distance metric, Sg,
Sg =
h
Jz
−IP
i "
Σzz
Σzm
Σmz
Σmm
# "
Jz
−IP
#
= JzΣzzJ
′
z −JzΣzm −ΣmzJ
′
z + Σmm
(22)
Second, we will propagate the uncertainty in the distance metric to uncertainty in the parameter
estimates through the implicit function theorem. Define the implicit function θ(d) that solves for
the parameter values that equate the model-implied moments to the provided data moments
g(θ(d), d) = 0
In the just-identified case where P = dim(θ) and the Jacobian of g(θ, d) with respect to θ,
denoted Jθ = ∂g(θ, d)/∂θ′, is nonsingular when evaluated at the true values of θ and d, we can
42In Section D.2 we omitted z from our notation for brevity, but in implementation z is the change in relative lease
prices that we simulate to compute the semi-elasticity of lease shares among the August-excluded group of vehicles.
The semi-elasticity is the model moment we target, the relative lease price change is a data input. To compute these
standard errors, we take into account the covariance between these two moments in the data from the joint regression
reported in Table A2.
75


===== [PAGE 78] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
totally differentiate the above equation to get
∂g
∂θ
′ dθ +
∂g
∂(z, m)
′ d(z, m) = 0 =⇒
dθ
d(z, m)
′ = −J−1
θ Jd
Therefore, by the delta method applied to the estimator θ(d),
√n(ˆθ −θ0) = √n(θ( ˆd) −θ(d0)) d→N(0, J−1
θ JdΣdJ
′
dJ−1′
θ
|
{z
}
Sθ
)
(23)
This gives us an expression for the asymptotic covariance of the parameter estimates
Sθ = J−1
θ JdΣdJ
′
dJ−1′
θ
= J−1
θ SgJ−1′
θ
We compute empirical standard errors in Table 5 by numerically approximating ˆJθ and ˆJz at
the estimated parameter values along with estimating the covariance of the moments ˆΣd in our
auxiliary data. We construct the latter as follows: (1) we assume the own-price elasticity target is
known with certainty and has zero covariance with the other data moments; (2) we compute the
covariance between our regression estimates of the relative lease price and lease share change in
the joint regression reported in Table A3 and assume zero covariance with the other data moments;
and (3) we bootstrap the covariance between of the six NVES data moments by resampling with
replacement the original survey responses. We assume the population distribution in the IRS SOI
is known with certainty.
To construct confidence intervals for our counterfactual outcomes, we take bootstrapped draws
of parameters according to the covariance matrix calculated above. We compute outcomes for each
counterfactual under each draw of parameters and report 95 percent confidence sets using the 2.5th
and 97.5th percentile of values in Appendix Table 7.
D.4
Sensitivity Analysis
Here we report sensitivity to assumptions on the MCPF, SCC, and CO2 emissions.
Appendix Table A5 revisits the calculation of constrained optimal uniform subsidies under
alternative assumptions. Under the global SCC, panel (e) shows a constrained optimal uniform EV
subsidy of $13,401, and a mean constrained optimal differentiated subsidy of $17,924. Although
Figure 7, panel (a), implies that the optimal policy applied to all vehicles and under the global SCC
would be a tax, we find that the constrained optimal policy applied only to the 30D-eligible is a
subsidy. This sign change between tax and subsidy occurs because the constrained optimal policy
does not tax GVs, and encourages sufficient substitution from GVs to EVs that subsidizing EVs
becomes optimal, highlighting the role of the substitution terms of our constrained optimal subsidy
formulas. Appendix Table A5 also revisits results using an MCPF of 1.4, reflecting the deadweight
loss of taxation. Here the constrained optimal uniform EV subsidy is $2,567 with a domestic SCC
and $3,807 with a global SCC, or about a third of what Table 8 finds assuming an MCPF of 1.
76


===== [PAGE 79] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
We also compute the lifetime externalities from EVs using long-run marginal emissions of
CO2 estimates from the MidCase scenario of the National Renewal Energy Laboratory’s Cam-
bium model. We choose these estimates as an alternative to our baseline estimates since they are
explicitly designed with policy evaluation and “long-term forward-looking decision-making” in mind
(Gagnon et al. 2024). Additionally, they are available at a suitably disaggregated level to allow for
close comparability with our baseline estimates. As with all forecasts, however, these estimates take
as given a particular policy landscape; most relevant to our analysis is their assumption that the
IRA credits for qualifying generation will remain in place. These long-run estimates imply carbon
emissions from driving a BEV that are less than 40 percent of our baseline values. Nevertheless,
due in large part to the importance of externalities from both accidents and manufacturing, this
translates to a shift of only a few hundred dollars in the constrained optimal uniform subsidy under
a domestic SCC. The primary welfare gains come in the form of reduced environmental damages,
as the long-run estimates imply a larger reduction in emissions from replacing a GV with an EV.
Appendix Table A7 applies the decomposition from equation (12) of the constrained optimal
uniform subsidies in Table 8. It decomposes these subsidies into four components—price distortions
(markups and externalities); indirect substitution; profit shifting; and tax distortion. We also show
the net value of US jobs gained for the planner that places weight on that outcome.43 We find that
the profit shifting motive is large, regardless of the SCC and MCPF assumptions.44 First consider
a setting with a global SCC and MCPF of 1, which Appendix Table A5 panel (e) shows has a
constrained optimal uniform subsidy of $13,393. This setting provides perhaps the largest scope
for environmental benefits relative to non-environmental concerns. Appendix Table A7 shows that
here the profit shifting component is $3,609, while distortions account for the remaining $9,784.
In this scenario, reducing distortions (market power and externalities) has nearly three times the
importance of profit shifting in guiding optimal policy. At the other extreme, consider a scenario
with a domestic SCC and MCPF of 1.4, which in Table A5 panel (a) has a constrained optimal
uniform subsidy of $2,566. This setting gives the least scope for environmental concerns and further
adds in the fiscal distortion from taxation. Here Appendix Table A7 shows that the profit shifting
component of constrained optimal subsidies is $3,321 while the externality and markup distortions
account for $3,363. Here, reducing distortions has roughly equal importance with profit shifting.
However, the tax distortion component is -$4,118, which significantly lowers the optimal scale of
the policy.
43The tax distortion component exceeds zero only when MCPF>1, so this term does not appear in the main text
equation (12) that assumes MCPF=1, but does appear in the appendix formulas (31) and (38) that allow MCPF>1.
Likewise, the jobs value component is a subset of the price distortion and indirect substitution components, modeled
as part of ϕj, though we present it separately in the table.
44All three counterfactual constrained optimal subsidies decrease foreign producer surplus relative to the IRA base-
line. In each counterfactual, producer surplus falls most in Japan, followed by South Korea, Germany, then Sweden.
These four countries have among the highest baseline EV registrations in the US. For example, the differentiated
subsidy using the global SCC decreases annual Japanese producer surplus by $1.3 billion annually.
77


===== [PAGE 80] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
D.5
Impacts of IRA on Investment and Other Outcomes
To learn about how additional EV manufacturing affects investment, we consulted the Clean In-
vestment Monitor, a project from MIT and Rhodium that tracks investments in clean technology
(Rhodium Group and MIT CEEPR 2025). From active investments there, two listings stand out
as large recent EV assembly plant projects with sufficient information for our purposes. The Ri-
vian facility in Normal, Illinois was recently expanded at the cost of $1.5 billion; the expansion is
predicted to increase production from 50,000 to 215,000 for an increase of 165,000 vehicles/year, or
a cost of $9,100 per additional vehicle/year (Channick 2025; Packowitz 2025; Rivian Automotive
2025). The Hyundai Metaplant near Savannah, Georgia consisted of $7.6 billion of investment and
is projected to produce up to 500,000 vehicles/year, or a cost of $15,000 per additional vehicle/year
(Hyundai Motor Group 2025). Of course, a greenfield plant may require greater investment than an
expansion. Taking these two estimates as representing a potential range for investment required to
produce additional EVs, the additional 272,000 US-assembled EVs we estimate are demanded in re-
sponse to the IRA credits would correspond to between $2.4 and $4 billion of additional investment
in assembly plants.
These back-of-the-envelope figures benefit from additional context. Assembly plants range in
capacity. The Hyundai plant mentioned above has capacity twice what we estimate to be the effect
of the IRA relative to the elimination of EV credits; the Tesla Fremont plant has similar capacity;
and the expanded F-150 Lightning plant can handle production of up to 150,000 EVs per year (Ford
Motor Company 2023; Tesla 2023; Hyundai Motor Group 2025). Of course, the increase in demand
due to the IRA EV credits is divided across many different submodels, whereas each assembly
plant produces one or a few submodels, so a single plant could not supply all the additional EVs
demanded due to the IRA credits. Regardless, the total number of additional EVs demanded due
to the EV credits is in the ballpark of the capacity of one or possibly two additional moderately
large assembly plants, assuming no baseline surplus assembly capacity.
Another way of understanding the effects on the manufacturing sector is through employment
in the automotive parts and final assembly sectors. The loss in domestic automotive manufacturing
jobs associated with a repeal of the IRA credits is approximately 12,000.45 The estimated cost per
additional automotive manufacturing job ranges from $169,000 per job-year over pre-IRA policy
to $563,000 per job-year over a scenario with no EV credits. This is 15 to 50 times larger than the
$10,700 per job-year reported in Slattery (2025) for the average discretionary government subsidy
awarded per promised job-year across their data. Our estimates of employment changes are relative
to a baseline employment across both parts and final assembly of approximately 850,000, and so
represents a fairly small fraction of the total industry employment.
45We calculate these effects by combining our model-implied marginal cost estimates I-O table and wage data
together with assumptions grounded in prior work of the cost breakdown between parts and final assembly; see
Appendix A.4 for more details.
78


===== [PAGE 81] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
E
Analytical Model Appendix
Recall CS is consumer surplus, PS = P
j qjµj is firm surplus, G = η P
j qj(τj + κj) is government
spending under an assumed MCPF, and E = P
j qjϕj is negative externalities, meaning ϕj > 0
would indicate damages. As we discuss in the main text, since physical incidence is independent
of economic incidence, τj and κj are perfect substitutes when there are no income-eligibility dis-
tinctions and there are infinite combinations of the two that yield the same welfare. We provide
results fixing κj = 0 and assuming all households are income-eligible.
E.1
First-Best
To derive the total surplus-maximizing subsidies for the global planner, we take the derivative of
W in equation (9) with respect to arbitrary good j = 1:
[τ1] :
∂W
∂τ1
= ∂CS
∂τ1
+ ∂PS
∂τ1
−∂G
∂τ1
−∂E
∂τ1
= 0
(24)
= q1 −
X
j
qj
∂pj
∂τ1
|
{z
}
∂CS
∂τ1
+
X
j
∂qj
∂τ1
µj +
X
j
qj
∂µj
∂τ1
|
{z
}
∂P S
∂τ1
−η
X
j
∂qj
∂τ1
τj −ηq1
|
{z
}
∂G
∂τ1
−
X
j
∂qj
∂τ1
ϕj
|
{z
}
∂E
∂τ1
= 0,
where the first term of the second line is from an Envelope condition. Firm markups are defined
by pj = µj + cj, so dpj = dµj given constant marginal costs. Using this and cancelling terms gives
η
X
j
∂qj
∂τ1
τj =
X
j
∂qj
∂τ1
µj −
X
j
∂qj
∂τ1
ϕj −(η −1)q1,
(25)
where the last term comes from the revenue-raising cost of subsidies due to the MCPF. In partic-
ular, it represents the marginal cost of raising funds at the current subsidy level that arises from
inframarginal take-up of q1. Doing this for all goods gives a system of equations whose solution is
ητ FB =
µ
|{z}
markup
−
ϕ
|{z}
negative externality
+ (η −1)Ωq
|
{z
}
tax distortion
,
(26)
where Ωis the (J+1)×(J+1) matrix of demand derivatives with representative element [Ωjr] = ∂qr
∂pj .
Notice that through the functional form of indirect utility in equation (3), demand derivatives with
respect to subsidies are the negative of derivatives with respect to prices, ∂qj
∂τr = −∂qj
∂pr . With η = 1,
this becomes the standard first-best taxation result τ FB
j
= µj −ϕj. With η ̸= 1, the planner equates
the total fiscal cost of the per vehicle subsidy, ητ FB
j
, with the total distortion in the economy arising
from unpriced externalities and transfers to inframarginal consumers.
79


===== [PAGE 82] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
E.2
Constrained Optimal Differentiated Subsidy
This subsection provides the derivation of a constrained optimal differentiated subsidy that only
applies to a subset of goods S. “Differentiated” means that the amount of the subsidy is allowed
to differ across goods in S. We allow the social planner to put no weight on some firms’ surplus,
for example a US planner that prioritizes domestic firms. We also allow the social planner to value
the externalities associated with vehicle sales differently, for example a ϕUS
j
that uses a lower social
cost of carbon or places additional weight on job creation. This nests the global planner solution
when all subsidy effects are internalized.
Taking the derivative of W US with respect to an arbitrary good, j = 1, in S, and denoting the
set of firms whose surplus does not contribute to welfare as For:
[τ1] :
∂W US
∂τ1
= q1 −
X
j
qj
∂pj
∂τ1
|
{z
}
∂CS
∂τ1
+
X
j
∂qj
∂τ1
µj +
X
j
qj
∂µj
∂τ1
|
{z
}
∂P S
∂τ1
(27)
−η
X
j∈S
∂qj
∂τ1
τj −ηq1
|
{z
}
∂G
∂τ1
−
X
j
∂qj
∂τ1
ϕUS
j
|
{z
}
∂E
∂τ1
−
X
j∈For
∂πj
∂τ1
|
{z
}
∂P SF or
∂τ1
= 0
Cancelling terms as in Section E.1 gives
η
X
j∈S
∂qj
∂τ1
τj =
X
j
∂qj
∂τ1
µj −
X
j
∂qj
∂τ1
ϕUS
j
−
X
j∈For
∂πj
∂τ1
−(η −1)q1.
(28)
Notice that through the functional form of indirect utility in equation (3), demand derivatives
with respect to subsidies are the negative of derivatives with respect to prices, ∂qj
∂τr = −∂qj
∂pr . If we
partition the sums between S and \S, combine terms, and substitute for price derivatives of the
opposite sign, we arrive at
η
X
j∈S
∂qj
∂p1
τj =
X
j∈S
∂qj
∂p1
 µj −ϕUS
j

+
X
j∈\S
∂qj
∂p1
 µj −ϕUS
j

+
X
j∈For
∂πj
∂τ1
+ (η −1)q1.
(29)
Each choice in S yields a first-order condition.
By expressing the sums as dot products of
vectors and then stacking these S equations, we get the following linear system in matrix notation
where τ S is an S × 1 vector of optimal differentiated subsidies
ηΩSτ S = ΩS
 µS −ϕUS
S

+ Ω\S

µ\S −ϕUS
\S

+ mFor + (η −1)qS
(30)
Here, Ωis the (J + 1) × (J + 1) matrix of demand derivatives with representative element
[Ωjr] = ∂qr
∂pj , and the S×S submatrix ΩS contains all elements with j ∈S, r ∈S. The S×(J +1−S)
submatrix Ω\S contains all elements with j ∈S, r ∈\S. Additionally, mFor is the vector of surplus
impacts on foreign firms corresponding to the final term in equation (29).
80


===== [PAGE 83] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Multiplying through by the inverse of ΩS gives the constrained optimal differentiated subsidy
τ SB
S
= 1
η
 µS −ϕUS
S

|
{z
}
price distortion
+ 1
ηΩ−1
S Ω\S

µ\S −ϕUS
\S

|
{z
}
indirect substitution
+ 1
ηΩ−1
S mFor
|
{z
}
profit shifting
+ (η −1)
η
Ω−1
S qS
|
{z
}
tax distortion
(31)
Intuitively, the subsidy deviates from the first-best by the amount of diversion (or “leakage”)
from the untargeted set of choices and to foreign firms’ surplus.
To derive an expression for mFor, we need to know
∂µj
∂τr , since the change in firm surplus
∂πj
∂τr = ∂qj
∂τr µj + qj
∂µj
∂τr is a combination of consumers’ demand response and firms’ markup response.
The full matrix of ∂πj
∂τr is the Jacobian of firm surplus with respect to subsidies. In Appendix D we
show that the solution to the Nash-Bertrand pricing game is determined by the linear system
q + ˜Ωµ = 0
(32)
where ˜Ωis the Jacobian matrix of demand derivatives but modified to contain zeros whenever
a firm does not own products j and r. That is, ˜Ω= Ω⊙H, where H is the firm product-ownership
matrix (⊙is the Hadamard product). We can pass the derivative with respect to τ through to
equation (32) to get,
Jµ(τ) = −˜Ω
−1  H ˜Ω(τ)µ −Ω

(33)
where J is the Jacobian and H is the (three-dimensional) Hessian with element

H˜Ω(τ)rjk

=
∂2qj
∂τr∂pk . While tedious to derive for the nested logit, the Hessian of demand with respect to prices
has a closed form.46 The challenge is in getting an expression for the term in parenthesis. One can
show that the (r, j)-th element of H ˜Ω(τ)µ −Ω, with product j belonging to firm f, is given by



X
k∈Jf(j)
∂2qj
∂τr∂pk
µk

−∂qj
∂pr

.
After being premultiplied by −˜Ω
−1, each element of the resulting matrix corresponds to ∂µj
∂τr .
This can be used to construct mFor using all j ∈For, r ∈S.
E.3
Constrained Optimal Uniform Subsidy
This subsection provides the derivation of Proposition 1 in the main text, the constrained optimal
uniform subsidy for a subset of goods S. “Uniform” means that we restrict the value of the subsidy,
46Starting from equation (6), one makes extensive use of the fact that the nested logit is a complete partition of
all options into separate nests. The first implication of this fact is that conditional shares take the form sr|g(j) =
sr
sg(j) δg(r),g(j), sr|c(j) =
sr
sc(j) δc(r),c(j), and sr|k(j) =
sr
sk(j) δk(r),k(j).
The second implication is that unconditional
nest shares simply aggregate over their member options, so sg(j) = P
ℓ∈J sℓδg(ℓ),g(j), sc(j) = P
ℓ∈J sℓδc(ℓ),c(j), and
sk(j) = P
ℓ∈J sℓδk(ℓ),k(j). Substituting in these expressions allows one to express the Hessian purely as a function of
demand derivatives, membership indicators, and the demand parameters.
81


===== [PAGE 84] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
τ, to be equal for all choices in S. We proceed in a similar fashion to Section E.2. Taking the
derivative of W US with respect to the scalar value τ, which changes the subsidy level for all choices
in S:
[τ] :
dW US
dτ
=
X
j∈S
qj −
X
j
qj
dpj
dτ
|
{z
}
dCS
dτ
+
X
j
dqj
dτ µj +
X
j
qj
dµj
dτ
|
{z
}
dP S
dτ
−η
X
j∈S
dqj
dτ τ SB,U −η
X
j∈S
qj
|
{z
}
dG
dτ
−
X
j
dqj
dτ ϕUS
j
|
{z
}
dE
dτ
−
X
j∈For
dπj
dτ
|
{z
}
dP SF or
dτ
= 0
(34)
Cancelling terms and rearranging gives
η
X
j∈S
dqj
dτ τ SB,U =
X
j
dqj
dτ µj −
X
j
dqj
dτ ϕUS
j
−
X
j∈For
dπj
dτ −(η −1)
X
j∈S
qj.
(35)
Separating sums by S and \S and combining terms gives
η
X
j∈S
dqj
dτ τ SB,U =
X
j∈S
dqj
dτ
 µj −ϕUS
j

+
X
j∈\S
dqj
dτ
 µj −ϕUS
j

−
X
j∈For
dπj
dτ −(η −1)
X
j∈S
qj.
(36)
Dividing through gives
τ SB,U =
P
j∈S
dqj
dτ (µj −ϕUS
j
)
η P
j∈S
dqj
dτ
+
P
j∈\S
dqj
dτ (µj −ϕUS
j
)
η P
j∈S
dqj
dτ
−
P
j∈For
dπj
dτ
η P
j∈S
dqj
dτ
−
(η −1) P
j∈S qj
η P
j∈S
dqj
dτ
(37)
Unit demand implies P
j∈S
dqj
dτ = −P
j∈\S
dqj
dτ . This simplifies to equation (12) when η = 1,
but takes the more general form:
τ SB,U = 1
η
 ¯µS −¯ϕUS
S

|
{z
}
price distortion
−1
η

¯µ\S −¯ϕUS
\S

|
{z
}
indirect substitution
−
P
j∈For
dπj
dτ
η P
j∈S
dqj
dτ
|
{z
}
profit shifting
−
(η −1) P
j∈S qj
η P
j∈S
dqj
dτ
|
{z
}
tax distortion
(38)
Each of the first two terms are demand-response weighted-averages of the unpriced externality. The
third term is the marginal profit shifted to foreign firms per marginal vehicle sold evaluated at the
level of subsidy. The final term is the revenue-raising cost of the marginal transfer under a given
MCPF. When we compute the optimal uniform subsidy for a US planner that places positive value
on job creation, ϕjobs
j
< 0 (recall ϕj are negative externalities), we break out the contribution of the
jobs component of the externality, reporting a “net jobs value” term equal to −1
η

¯ϕjobs
S
−¯ϕjobs
\S

.
82


===== [PAGE 85] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
References
Anderson, Michael L. and Maximilian Auffhammer 2014. “Pounds That Kill: The External Costs of Vehicle
Weight”. Review of Economic Studies 81.2, pp. 535–571.
Bautista, Aldrich 2024. Tesla Car Price History. Available at https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/
1F5IQOynIawoXiJPVarLDgPQDJAdzY8b5Vamw-Vf3eSY/ (accessed Sept. 5, 2024).
Berry, Steven T. 1994. “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation”. RAND Journal of Eco-
nomics, pp. 242–262.
Channick, Robert 2025. Rivian hosts R2 open house in Normal, its new production home. https://www.gmtoday.
com/autos/rivian-hosts-r2-open-house-in-normal-its-new-production-home/article_8533f812-f5f6-
11ee-9d03-9b662556ccb0.html (accessed Sept. 5, 2025).
Clay, Karen, Akshaya Jha, Nicholas Z Muller, and Randy Walsh 2019. “The external costs of shipping
petroleum products by pipeline and rail: Evidence of shipments of crude oil from North Dakota”. The Energy
Journal 40.1, pp. 10–5547.
Cuenca, R.M., L.L. Gaines, and A.D. Vyas 1999. Evaluation of Electric Vehicle Production and Operating Costs.
Tech. rep. Argonne National Laboratory.
Ford Motor Company 2023. F-150 Lightning Production to Triple Following Plant Expansion. https://www.
fromtheroad . ford . com / us / en / articles / 2023 / ford - restarts - expanded - rouge - electric - vehicle -
center--f-150-ligh (accessed Sept. 5, 2025).
Gagnon, Pieter, Pedro Andres Sanchez Perez, Julian Florez, James Morris, Marck Llerena Velasquez,
and Jordan Eisenman 2024. Cambium 2024 Data. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. url: https://
scenarioviewer.nrel.gov.
Grigolon, Laura and Frank Verboven 2014. “Nested Logit or Random Coefficients Logit? A Comparison of
Alternative Discrete Choice Models of Product Differentiation”. Review of Economics and Statistics 96.5, pp. 916–
935.
Hainmueller, Jens 2012. “Entropy Balancing for Causal Effects: A Multivariate Reweighting Method to Produce
Balanced Samples in Observational Studies”. Political Analysis 20.1, pp. 25–46.
Holland, Stephen P., Erin T. Mansur, Nicholas Z. Muller, and Andrew J. Yates 2016. “Are There Environ-
mental Benefits from Driving Electric Vehicles? The Importance of Local Factors”. American Economic Review
106.12, pp. 3700–3729.
Holland, Stephen P., Erin T. Mansur, Valentin Verdier, and Andrew J. Yates 2024. “A New Estimator for
Marginal Emissions”. NBER Working Paper 32065.
Hyundai Motor Group 2025. HMGMA - Hyundai Motor Group Metaplant America. https://www.hmgma.com
(accessed Sept. 5, 2025).
InsideEVs 2024. The Best EV Lease And Finance Deals In May 2024. https://insideevs.com/features/410039/
best-electric-car-deals-this-month/ (accessed May 29, 2024, through the Internet Archive).
Internal Revenue Service 2023. Statistics of Income: Individual Income Tax Returns. Tech. rep. Publication 1304.
International Organization of Motor Vehicle Manufacturers 2023. 2023 Production Statistics. https://www.
oica.net/category/production-statistics/2023-statistics/ (accessed Sept. 5, 2025).
Jacobsen, Mark R., James M. Sallee, Joseph S. Shapiro, and Arthur A. van Benthem 2023. “Regulating
Untaxable Externalities: Are Vehicle Air Pollution Standards Effective and Efficient?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 138.3, pp. 1907–1976.
McFadden, Daniel 1978. “Modeling the Choice of Residential Location”. Transportation Research Record 673,
pp. 72–77.
Miravete, Eugenio J., Katja Seim, and Jeff Thurk 2023. “Pass-through and tax incidence in differentiated
product markets”. International Journal of Industrial Organization 90, p. 102985.
Morrow, W. Ross and Steven J. Skerlos 2011. “Fixed-Point Approaches to Computing Bertrand-Nash Equilib-
rium Prices Under Mixed Logit Demand”. Operations Research 59.2, pp. 328–345.
National Automobile Dealers Association 2023. NADA Market Beat: 2023 New Light-Vehicle Sales Reach 15.46
Million Units. https://www.nada.org/nada/nada-headlines/nada-market-beat-2023-new-light-vehicle-
sales-reach-1546-million-units (accessed Sept. 5, 2025).
Packowitz, Howard 2025. Rivian on ’accelerated’ construction schedule for massive plant expansion in Normal.
https://www.25newsnow.com/2025/03/25/rivian-accelerated-construction-schedule-massive-plant-
expansion-normal/. Accessed Sept. 5, 2025.
Pl¨otz, Patrick, Cornelius Moll, Georg Bieker, Peter Mock, and Yaoming Li 2020. “Real-world usage of plug-
in hybrid electric vehicles: fuel consumption, electric driving, and CO2 emissions”. https://theicct.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/PHEV-white-paper-sept2020-0.pdf. ICCT White Paper.
Rhodium Group and MIT CEEPR 2025. The Clean Investment Monitor. https://www.cleaninvestmentmonitor.
org (accessed Sept. 8, 2025).
83


===== [PAGE 86] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Ricke, Katharine, Laurent Drouet, Ken Caldeira, and Massimo Tavoni 2018. “Country-level social cost of
carbon”. Nature Climate Change 8.10, pp. 895–900.
Rivian Automotive 2025. Rivian Releases Q4 2024 Production and Delivery Figures and Sets Date for Fourth
Quarter and Full Year 2024 Results. https://rivian.com/newsroom/article/rivian-releases-q4-2024-
production-and-delivery-figures (accessed Sept. 5, 2025).
Slattery, Cailin 2025. “Bidding for Firms: Subsidy Competition in the United States”. Journal of Political Economy
133.8, pp. 2563–2614.
Small, Kenneth A. and Harvey S. Rosen 1981. “Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete Choice Models”.
Econometrica 49.1, pp. 105–130.
Tesla 2023. Q4 and FY 2023 Update. https://digitalassets.tesla.com/tesla-contents/image/upload/IR/
TSLA-Q4-2023-Update.pdf (accessed Sept. 5, 2025).
US EPA 2024. Certified Vehicle Test Results Report Data (Model Years: 2014 - Present). https://www.epa.
gov/system/files/documents/2024-02/light-duty-vehicle-test-results-report-2014-present.xlsx
(accessed July 12, 2024).
US International Trade Administration 2025. New Vehicle Trade Data Visualization. https://www.trade.gov/
data-visualization/new-vehicle-trade-data-visualization (accessed Sept. 5, 2025).
84


===== [PAGE 87] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Table A1: Share-Weighted Average Externalities by Vehicle Powertrain (Long-Run
Grid)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Electric Vehicles
All EVs
Battery electric
vehicles
Plug-in
hybrids
Gasoline
vehicles
Driving CO2 (global SCC)
3,494
2,335
9,104
13,597
Total negative externality
Global SCC
10,539
9,343
16,332
19,327
Domestic SCC
4,816
4,496
6,368
5,689
Notes: This table presents market share-weighted average lifetime externalities across submodels within a
powertrain, weighting submodels by average monthly sales in months when the submodel was available.
Units are $/vehicle.
Table A2: Estimated Lease Moments
Model:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Dependent variables:
Leasing share (%)
Lease price relative to purchase price ($000s)
Variables
Excluded Aug 2022 × July-August 2023
39.31
-5.677
-4.844
(3.972)
(0.8275)
(1.142)
Fixed effects
Submodel
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year-month
Yes
Yes
Yes
Fit statistics
R2
0.91635
0.72685
0.76565
Observations
3,988
3,165
1,903
Notes: This table presents regression results for the group of EVs which were excluded from 30D eligibility
in August 2022. It compares outcomes for July-August 2023 with those from late 2022; columns 1 and 2
compare against the fourth quarter of 2022, whereas column 3 compares against December 2022 only. The
regressions are weighted at the submodel level according to average registrations during the months the
submodel was available, and standard errors are clustered at the model level. When calculating standard
errors in the model following Appendix D.3, we estimate columns 1 and 2 jointly with stacked OLS equations,
giving an estimated covariance of -1.688 along with the standard errors.
85


===== [PAGE 88] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Table A3: Estimated Purchase Price Effects
Model:
(1)
Dependent variable:
Purchase price ($000s)
Variables
Excluded Aug 2022 or
Excluded/Reduced Apr 2023 × July-August 2023
0.3724
(0.5065)
Fixed effects
Submodel
Yes
Year-month
Yes
Fit statistics
R2
0.98994
Observations
16,047
Notes: This table presents regression results for the group of EVs which were excluded from 30D eligibility in
August 2022 and in either excluded from 30D or who experienced reductions in purchase credits in April 2023.
The pre-period is defined as the three months prior to the eligibility change (considered to be September
2022 and May 2023, respectively); the control group is all GVs. The regression is weighted at the submodel
level according to average registrations during the months the submodel was available, and standard errors
are clustered at the model level.
86


===== [PAGE 89] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Table A4: Effects of Counterfactual Policies on Market and Welfare Outcomes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Repeal IRA
Modify Trade Limits
IRA
(baseline)
Eliminate EV
Credits
Return to
Pre-IRA 30D
with phaseout
IRA, add trade
restrictions on
leases
IRA, remove
trade
restrictions
IRA, remove
income
threshold
Panel (a): Market Aggregates under Counterfactual Scenario
10,633
10,519
10,596
10,613
10,688
10,634
1.
Vehicle registrations (000s/year)
[10,511, 10,527] [10,592, 10,602] [10,610, 10,616] [10,683, 10,695] [10,634, 10,634]
4,017
3,804
3,738
4,027
3,970
4,032
2.
US firms (000s/year)
[3,796, 3,812]
[3,728, 3,746]
[4,024, 4,028]
[3,966, 3,972]
[4,031, 4,033]
6,616
6,714
6,858
6,586
6,718
6,602
3.
Foreign firms (000s/year)
[6,709, 6,723]
[6,849, 6,871]
[6,582, 6,592]
[6,711, 6,728]
[6,601, 6,603]
1,184
924
1,117
1,134
1,313
1,199
4.
EV registrations (000s/year)
[912, 937]
[1,108, 1,131]
[1,128, 1,143]
[1,304, 1,326]
[1,198, 1,200]
835
571
543
834
812
856
5.
US firms (000s/year)
[561, 579]
[534, 550]
[833, 835]
[810, 813]
[855, 857]
349
353
574
300
501
343
6.
Foreign firms (000s/year)
[345, 365]
[563, 593]
[293, 309]
[491, 516]
[343, 343]
11.1
8.8
10.5
10.7
12.3
11.3
7.
EV market share (%)
[8.7, 8.9]
[10.5, 10.7]
[10.6, 10.8]
[12.2, 12.4]
[11.3, 11.3]
29.3
9.8
10.8
12.9
15.4
26.5
8.
Lease share, within EVs (%)
[6.3, 12.1]
[7.1, 13.3]
[10.8, 14.3]
[13.1, 16.9]
[25.6, 27.0]
70.5
61.0
50.6
73.8
61.3
71.3
9.
US assembly share, within EVs (%)
[60.1, 61.6]
[49.5, 51.3]
[73.1, 74.2]
[60.6, 61.8]
[71.2, 71.4]
-
26.5
36.5
31.9
13.5
40.3
10. Cost per additional EV ($000s/EV)
[25.3, 28.2]
[32.4, 45.6]
[28.4, 39.2]
[12.7, 14.1]
[35.7, 42.6]
Panel (b): Employment and Battery Production Effects Relative to IRA Baseline (000s/year)
-
-12.3
-14.5
0.7
-3.5
0.7
11. ∆US auto manufacturing jobs
[-12.9, -11.7]
[-15.2, -13.9]
[0.5, 0.9]
[-3.8, -3.3]
[0.7, 0.7]
-
-7.8
-9.3
0.5
-2.3
0.5
12.
∆US auto parts jobs
[-8.2, -7.4]
[-9.8, -8.9]
[0.4, 0.6]
[-2.5, -2.2]
[0.4, 0.5]
-
-4.5
-5.2
0.2
-1.2
0.2
13.
∆US auto assembly jobs
[-4.7, -4.3]
[-5.4, -5.0]
[0.1, 0.3]
[-1.3, -1.1]
[0.2, 0.2]
-
-258
-289
11
-34
19
14. ∆US-assembled EV batteries
[-267, -249]
[-298, -282]
[8.99, 12.4]
[-37.5, -32.5]
[17.7, 20.1]
-
563
169
-2,160
-499
877
15. Cost per additional US job
($000s/job)
[537, 588]
[159, 179]
[-3,242, -1,752]
[-523, -475]
[753, 948]
Continued on next page
87


===== [PAGE 90] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Table A4 (continued from previous page)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Repeal IRA
Modify Trade Limits
IRA
(baseline)
Eliminate EV
Credits
Return to
Pre-IRA 30D
with phaseout
IRA, add trade
restrictions on
leases
IRA, remove
trade
restrictions
IRA, remove
income
threshold
Panel (c): Surplus Effects Relative to IRA Baseline ($billion/year)
-
-4.84
-0.88
-1.08
2.33
0.67
16. ∆US consumer surplus
[-4.97, -4.63]
[-1.04, -0.59]
[-1.20, -0.87]
[2.21, 2.55]
[0.63, 0.70]
-
-1.63
-1.37
0.10
-0.05
0.08
17. ∆Global producer surplus
[-1.67, -1.60]
[-1.41, -1.32]
[0.07, 0.12]
[-0.09, 0.00]
[0.07, 0.09]
-
-2.56
-3.67
0.35
-0.95
0.28
18.
∆US producer surplus
[-2.65, -2.50]
[-3.78, -3.61]
[0.27, 0.40]
[-1.02, -0.90]
[0.26, 0.30]
-
0.93
2.30
-0.25
0.90
-0.20
19.
∆Foreign producer surplus
[0.88, 1.00]
[2.24, 2.43]
[-0.28, -0.19]
[0.85, 0.98]
[-0.21, -0.19]
-
5.74
3.03
0.51
-2.14
-0.50
20. ∆CO2 emissions (million tons/year)
[5.47, 5.98]
[2.80, 3.20]
[0.37, 0.60]
[-2.34, -1.99]
[-0.52, -0.46]
∆Global negative externalities
-
1.47
0.89
0.11
-0.55
-0.13
21. (global SCC)
[1.40, 1.53]
[0.82, 0.93]
[0.07, 0.13]
[-0.61, -0.51]
[-0.13, -0.11]
∆US negative externalities
-
0.25
0.24
0.00
-0.10
-0.02
22.
(domestic SCC)
[0.23, 0.26]
[0.23, 0.25]
[-0.01, 0.00]
[-0.11, -0.09]
[-0.02, -0.02]
∆Foreign negative externalities
-
1.22
0.65
0.11
-0.46
-0.11
23.
(foreign SCC)
[1.17, 1.28]
[0.60, 0.68]
[0.08, 0.13]
[-0.50, -0.43]
[-0.11, -0.10]
-
-6.90
-2.45
-1.61
1.74
0.60
24. ∆US government spending
[-6.99, -6.86]
[-2.49, -2.41]
[-1.63, -1.60]
[1.69, 1.82]
[0.51, 0.66]
-
-1.04
-0.69
0.52
1.09
0.28
25. ∆Global surplus
[-1.23, -0.72]
[-0.88, -0.35]
[0.38, 0.76]
[0.97, 1.31]
[0.25, 0.32]
-
-1.97
-2.99
0.77
0.19
0.48
26.
∆US total surplus (global SCC)
[-2.11, -1.73]
[-3.12, -2.77]
[0.66, 0.95]
[0.12, 0.33]
[0.45, 0.52]
∆US total surplus
-
-0.74
-2.35
0.88
-0.27
0.37
27.
(domestic SCC)
[-0.85, -0.53]
[-2.44, -2.17]
[0.79, 1.03]
[-0.32, -0.17]
[0.34, 0.42]
∆Foreign total surplus
-
-0.30
1.66
-0.36
1.36
-0.09
28.
(foreign SCC)
[-0.39, -0.18]
[1.56, 1.82]
[-0.41, -0.27]
[1.28, 1.48]
[-0.10, -0.09]
Panel (d): Welfare Cost per Ton of CO2 Abated
-
59.8
13.8
1,269
-268
-318
29. Global cost/ton CO2 abated
($/ton)
[32.5, 109]
[-35.7, 119]
[869, 2,258]
[-324, -229]
[-457, -248]
-
-101
-747
1,759
152
-719
30. US cost/ton CO2 abated ($/ton)
[-119, -65.8]
[-772, -722]
[1,330, 2,761]
[101, 184]
[-870, -642]
Panel (e): MVPF of Higher-Spending versus Lower-Spending Scenario
-
1.15
1.28
0.68
1.63
1.46
31. Global MVPF
[1.10, 1.18]
[1.14, 1.36]
[0.53, 0.76]
[1.56, 1.72]
[1.39, 1.64]
-
1.28
2.22
0.52
1.11
1.79
32.
US MVPF (global SCC)
[1.25, 1.31]
[2.14, 2.26]
[0.41, 0.59]
[1.07, 1.18]
[1.70, 2.01]
-
1.11
1.96
0.45
0.85
1.61
33.
US MVPF (domestic SCC)
[1.08, 1.12]
[1.90, 1.99]
[0.37, 0.50]
[0.81, 0.91]
[1.53, 1.82]
Continued on next page
88


===== [PAGE 91] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Table A4 (continued from previous page)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Repeal IRA
Modify Trade Limits
IRA
(baseline)
Eliminate EV
Credits
Return to
Pre-IRA 30D
with phaseout
IRA, add trade
restrictions on
leases
IRA, remove
trade
restrictions
IRA, remove
income
threshold
Panel (f): Allocation of EV Credits
79.7
0.00
65.9
66.8
87.8
86.8
34. Share of EVs with credits (%)
[0.00, 0.00]
[65.2, 67.0]
[66.5, 67.2]
[87.4, 88.5]
[86.7, 86.8]
44.0
0.00
64.8
23.0
41.5
78.7
35.
Among HHs >$300k (%)
[0.00, 0.00]
[64.2, 65.7]
[20.8, 26.7]
[39.9, 43.9]
[77.5, 79.3]
Notes: This table reproduces Table 7 with bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals calculated as described in Section D.3. We take 499
draws of the parameters according to the estimated covariance matrix and report the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of each outcome.
89


===== [PAGE 92] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Table A5: Counterfactual Simulation Results: Sensitivity Analysis
(1)
(2)
(3)
IRA
US-optimal
uniform EV
subsidy with
30D restrictions
US-optimal
differentiated EV
subsidy with
30D restrictions
Panel (a): Marginal Cost of Public Funds = 1.4, Social Cost of Carbon = $28
1.
Mean EV subsidy
$7,180
$2,567
$3,807
2.
∆Global negative externalities
-0.25
-0.04
-0.38
3.
∆Global surplus
-2.95
-0.32
-0.39
4.
∆US total surplus (global SCC)
-2.02
0.21
0.39
5.
Cost per additional EV ($000s/EV)
37.1
31.5
38.0
6.
US MVPF (global SCC)
0.79
1.09
1.11
Panel (b): Marginal Cost of Public Funds = 1.4, Social Cost of Carbon = $241
1.
Mean EV subsidy
$7,180
$4,725
$7,003
2.
∆Global negative externalities
-1.47
-0.74
-2.00
3.
∆Global surplus
-1.72
-0.31
-0.16
4.
∆US total surplus (global SCC)
-0.80
0.69
1.20
5.
Cost per additional EV ($000s/EV)
37.1
33.7
41.8
6.
US MVPF (global SCC)
0.92
1.14
1.15
Panel (c): Social Cost of Carbon = $100
1.
Mean EV subsidy
$7,180
$10,847
$13,864
2.
∆Global negative externalities
-0.66
-0.87
-2.17
3.
∆Global surplus
0.23
0.21
0.64
4.
∆US total surplus (global SCC)
1.16
2.70
3.73
5.
Cost per additional EV ($000s/EV)
26.5
28.2
33.0
6.
US MVPF (global SCC)
1.17
1.22
1.22
Panel (d): Social Cost of Carbon = $200
1.
Mean EV subsidy
$7,180
$12,641
$16,715
2.
∆Global negative externalities
-1.23
-2.18
-4.69
3.
∆Global surplus
0.80
0.72
1.58
4.
∆US total surplus (global SCC)
1.73
3.69
5.33
5.
Cost per additional EV ($000s/EV)
26.5
29.4
35.2
6.
US MVPF (global SCC)
1.25
1.23
1.23
Panel (e): Social Cost of Carbon = $241
1.
Mean EV subsidy
$7,180
$13,401
$17,924
2.
∆Global negative externalities
-1.47
-2.87
-6.04
3.
∆Global surplus
1.04
0.98
2.08
4.
∆US total surplus (global SCC)
1.97
4.16
6.13
5.
Cost per additional EV ($000s/EV)
26.5
29.8
36.1
6.
US MVPF (global SCC)
1.28
1.24
1.23
Notes: This table presents sensitivity analysis for counterfactual simulation results presented in Table 7.
All results are relative to the scenario with no EV credits. For each scenario, in column 2 we simulate
the uniform EV subsidy subject to Section 30D trade restrictions that maximizes US total surplus and, in
column 3, the choice-specific differentiated EV subsidy that maximizes US total surplus. The defaults are
an MCPF of 1 and an SCC of $241. Mean and standard deviation of subsidies are computed only on EVs
which are eligible to receive subsidies among income-eligible households as implied by the model. The set
of EVs eligible to receive subsidies in all scenarios are those vehicles already eligible under 30D in the IRA.
Uniform subsidy scenarios do not impose any household income restrictions whereas the IRA does. “US
total surplus” equals “[global] total surplus” minus foreign automakers’ producer surplus.
90


===== [PAGE 93] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Table A6: Counterfactual Simulation Results: Model Robustness
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Main spec-
ification
Homog-
eneous
demand
Foreign/
domestic
nest
Elasticity
of -4
Nocke-
Schutz
restriction
Non-Tesla
EVs priced
at cost
Panel (a): Market Aggregates under Counterfactual Scenario
1.
∆Vehicle registrations (000s/year)
114
168
93.8
92.0
170
142
2.
∆EV registrations (000s/year)
260
307
209
205
312
318
3.
∆EV market share (pp)
2.4
2.76
1.88
1.85
2.80
2.78
4.
∆Lease share, within EVs (pp)
19.5
17.1
19.0
19.1
17.1
26.2
5.
∆US assembly share, within EVs (pp)
9.49
10.4
7.53
7.60
11.0
11.1
Panel (b): Surplus Effects Relative to No EV Subsidy Baseline ($billion/year)
6.
∆US consumer surplus
4.84
5.10
5.17
5.16
5.17
6.05
7.
∆Global producer surplus
1.63
2.11
1.69
1.71
1.84
0.26
8.
∆US producer surplus
2.56
2.93
2.70
2.73
2.66
1.29
9.
∆Foreign producer surplus
-0.93
-0.82
-1.01
-1.02
-0.81
-1.03
10.
∆Global neg. externalities (global SCC)
-1.47
-1.54
-1.20
-1.17
-1.58
-1.43
11.
∆US neg. externalities (dom. SCC)
-0.25
-0.21
-0.21
-0.20
-0.21
-0.17
12.
∆Foreign neg. externalities (for. SCC)
-1.22
-1.33
-0.99
-0.97
-1.36
-1.25
13.
∆US government spending
6.90
7.38
6.85
6.85
7.38
8.91
14.
∆Global surplus
1.04
1.37
1.22
1.19
1.21
-1.17
15.
∆US total surplus (global SCC)
1.97
2.19
2.23
2.21
2.03
-0.14
16.
∆US total surplus (dom. SCC)
0.74
0.86
1.23
1.24
0.67
-1.39
17.
∆Foreign total surplus (for. SCC)
0.30
0.51
-0.02
-0.05
0.55
0.22
Panel (c): Impacts on CO2 Relative to No EV Subsidy Baseline
18.
∆CO2 emissions (million tons/year)
-5.74
-6.25
-4.66
-4.56
-6.39
-5.88
Panel (d): Employment and Battery Production Effects Relative to No EV Subsidy Baseline (000s/year)
19.
∆US auto manufacturing jobs
12.3
15.3
8.87
8.84
16.3
15.4
20.
∆US auto parts jobs
7.8
9.80
5.62
5.62
10.4
9.70
21.
∆US auto assembly jobs
4.5
5.53
3.25
3.23
5.88
5.67
Panel (e): MVPF versus No EV Subsidy Baseline
22.
Global MVPF
1.15
1.19
1.18
1.17
1.16
0.87
23.
US MVPF (global SCC)
1.28
1.30
1.33
1.32
1.28
0.98
24.
US MVPF (domestic SCC)
1.11
1.12
1.18
1.18
1.09
0.84
25.
Cost per additional EV ($000s/EV)
26.5
24.0
32.8
33.4
23.6
28.0
26.
Cost per additional US job ($000s/job)
563
481
772
775
453
580
27.
US-optimal uniform EV subsidy
with 30D restrictions
$9,606
$8,443
$12,855
$12,942
$7,759
$3,132
Notes: This table presents simulation results comparing outcomes under the IRA against a counterfactual with no EV
subsidies.
Column 1 is the main specification also reported in Table 7.
Column 2 reports a specification that restricts
all coefficients interacted with income and does not account for income-eligibility.
Column 3 modifies the nested logit
assumption by replacing the vehicle class nest in the second level of the tree in Figure A15 with the US- or foreign-firm
classification. Column 4 targets an alternative, more inelastic own-price model-level elasticity. Column 5 modifies the supply
side assumptions under the same homogeneous demand model in column 2 as discussed in Section 6. Column 6 restricts all
firms except Tesla to pricing their EVs at marginal cost.
91


===== [PAGE 94] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Table A7: Decomposition of Constrained Optimal Uniform Subsidies
MCPF = 1.0,
SCC = $28,
Job = $0
MCPF = 1.4,
SCC = $28,
Job = $0
MCPF = 1.0,
SCC = $241,
Job = $0
MCPF = 1.4,
SCC = $241,
Job = $0
MCPF = 1.0,
SCC = $28,
Job = $10.7k
MCPF = 1.0,
SCC = $241,
Job = $10.7k
Price distortion
$5,793
$3,928
-$2,880
-$2,304
-$5,821
-$2,853
Indirect substitution
-$128
-$565
$12,664
$8,154
-$85
$12,728
Net jobs value
–
–
–
–
$485
$485
Externality Subtotal
$5,664
$3,363
$9,784
$5,850
$6,221
$10,361
Profit shifting
$3,933
$3,321
$3,609
$3,155
$3,889
$3,569
Tax distortion
–
-$4,118
–
-$4,279
–
–
Uniform subsidy
$9,597
$2,566
$13,393
$4,725
$10,111
$13,929
Notes: This table presents the decomposition of constrained optimal uniform subsidies for a US social
planner under given values of the marginal cost of public funds and social cost of carbon. Each component
corresponds to the respective term in proposition 1, using equation (38) in the appendix for the more general
case of an MCPF greater than one. The value of jobs is treated as an externality in the formula but reported
separately as the value placed on net additional US manufacturing jobs. The combined externality and
markup components sum to the subtotal displayed in row 4. Columns 1 and 5 correspond to the uniform
subsidies calculated in Table 8. Columns 2-4 correspond to uniform subsidies calculated in Table A5 under,
respectively, panels (a), (e), and (b). The decomposition was calculated by numerically approximating the
derivatives in equation (38) at the subsidy value. Note how the price distortion terms (row 1) relates to
the distribution of price distortions in Figure 7, panels (a) and (b): under a global social cost of carbon,
the price distortion alone implies a tax, whereas under a domestic social cost of carbon, the price distortion
alone implies a subsidy.
92


===== [PAGE 95] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A1: Monthly Registrations and Prices of Teslas and Other EVs
(a) Registrations
20
30
40
50
60
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
Registrations (000s)
Tesla
All other EVs
(b) Average Purchase Prices
50
55
60
65
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
Purchase price ($000s)
Eligibility
Tesla
All other EVs
Notes: Panel (a) presents monthly registrations of Teslas and other EVs. Panel (b) presents price indexes
constructed by computing the January 2023 weighted averages (weighting models by average monthly sales
in months when the model was available) for Tesla and non-Tesla EVs, and then recursively adding the
sales-weighted average changes for all models available in each previous or subsequent month.
93


===== [PAGE 96] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A2: Aggregate Electric Vehicle Market Trends
(a) Share of New Vehicle Registrations that Are Electric Vehicles
6%
8%
10%
12%
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
EV market share
(b) Share of New Electric Vehicle Registrations that Are Assembled in the US
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
Assembly share
Electric vehicles (US)
Electric vehicles (N. Am.)
Gasoline vehicles (US)
Gasoline vehicles (N. Am.)
Notes: Panel (a) presents the share of new vehicle registrations that are EVs. Panel (b) presents the share
of new vehicles registered that are assembled in the United States or in North America broadly.
94


===== [PAGE 97] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A3: Cox Data Coverage Rate
(a) Cox Data Coverage Rate by Make
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
>100%
Acura
Alfa Romeo
Aston Martin
Audi
Bentley
BMW
Buick
Cadillac
Chevrolet
Chrysler
Dodge
Ferrari
FIAT
Fisker
Ford
Genesis
GMC
Honda
Hyundai
Ineos
Infiniti
Jaguar
Jeep
Kia
Lamborghini
Land Rover
Lexus
Lincoln
Lucid
Maserati
Mazda
McLaren
Mercedes−Benz
MINI
Mitsubishi
Nissan
Polestar
Porsche
Ram
Rivian
Rolls−Royce
Subaru
Tesla
Toyota
VinFast
Volkswagen
Volvo
Make
Coverage rate
(b) Cox Data Coverage Rate by State
0%
10%
20%
30%
WV
OH
CO
NE
IL
KY
ME
IN
NH
SD
VT
CT
ND
NY
IA
HI
WI
MS
NJ
PA
AL
KS
WA
AR
DE
OR
LA
UT
TN
FL
GA
MI
MN
MO
MA
NM
SC
VA
NC
ID
TX
WY
RI
MD
CA
MT
NV
AZ
OK
AK
State
Coverage rate
Notes: Panel (a) shows the ratio of new vehicle transactions in the Cox dealership data to nationwide
new vehicle registrations in the Experian data, for each make. Panel (b) shows the ratio of new vehicle
transactions in the Cox dealership data to state-level registrations from 2023.
95


===== [PAGE 98] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A4: Availability by Month for Each Electric Vehicle Submodel
VOLV XC90 PLUS; PHEV
VOLV XC90 ULTIMATE; PHEV
VOLV XC60 PLUS; PHEV
VOLV XC60 ULTIMAT; PHEVE
VOLV XC40 RECHARGE −; BEV
VOLV S60 T8 RECHARGE INS; PHEV
VOLV S60 T8 RECHARGE R−D; PHEV
VOLV C40 RECHARGE PLUS; BEV
VOLV C40 RECHARGE ULTIMA; BEV
VOLK ID.4 −; BEV
VOLK ID.4 S; BEV
VOLK ID.4 PRO; BEV
VOLK ID.4 PRO S~PRO S PLUS; BEV
VNFS VF 8 PLUS; BEV
TOYT RAV4 PRIME SE; PHEV
TOYT RAV4 PRIME XSE; PHEV
TOYT PRIUS PRIME LE~SE; PHEV
TOYT BZ4X XLE; BEV
TESL MODEL Y −; BEV
TESL MODEL X −; BEV
TESL MODEL S −; BEV
TESL MODEL 3 −; BEV
SUBA SOLTERRA PREMIUM; BEV
RIVA R1T LAUNCH EDITION; BEV
RIVA R1T ADVENTURE; BEV
RIVA R1S LAUNCH EDITION; BEV
RIVA R1S ADVENTURE; BEV
PORS TAYCAN TURBO; BEV
PORS TAYCAN CROSS TURISMO 4; BEV
PORS TAYCAN GTS; BEV
PORS TAYCAN 4S; BEV
PORS TAYCAN −; BEV
PORS CAYENNE E HYBRID COUPE; PHEV
PORS CAYENNE E−HYBRID; PHEV
PLSR 2 −; BEV
NISS LEAF SL PLUS; BEV
NISS LEAF S PLUS; BEV
NISS LEAF SV; BEV
NISS LEAF S; BEV
NISS LEAF SV PLUS; BEV
NISS ARIYA VENTURE+; BEV
NISS ARIYA PLATINUM +; BEV
NISS ARIYA ENGAGE; BEV
NISS ARIYA EVOLVE+; BEV
MNNI COOPER S E COUNTRYMAN; PHEV
MNNI COOPER SE; BEV
MITS OUTLANDER SE; PHEV
MITS OUTLANDER SEL; PHEV
MERZ GLE 450E 4MATIC; PHEV
MERZ EQS SUV 450 4MATIC; BEV
MERZ EQS SUV 450+; BEV
MERZ EQS SUV 580 4MATIC; BEV
MERZ EQS SEDAN 450 4MATIC; BEV
MERZ EQS SEDAN 580 4MATIC; BEV
MERZ EQS SEDAN 450+; BEV
MERZ EQB 350 4MATIC; BEV
MERZ EQB 250+; BEV
MERZ EQB 300 4MATIC; BEV
MAZD MX−30 PREMIUM PLUS; BEV
MAZD CX−90 PREFERRED; PHEV
MAZD CX−90 PREMIUM; PHEV
MAZD CX−90 PREMIUM PLUS; PHEV
LUCI AIR GRAND TOURING; BEV
LUCI AIR TOURING; BEV
LUCI AIR PURE; BEV
LINC CORSAIR GRAND TOURING; PHEV
LINC AVIATOR GRAND TOURING; PHEV
LEXS RZ 450E; BEV
LEXS RX 450H+ LUXURY; PHEV
LEXS NX 450H; PHEV
KIA SPORTAGE X LINE; PHEV
KIA SPORTAGE X−LINE PRESTIGE; PHEV
KIA SORENTO SX; PHEV
KIA SORENTO SX PRESTIGE; PHEV
KIA NIRO EX PREMIUM; PHEV
KIA NIRO LXS; PHEV
KIA NIRO SX TOURING; PHEV
KIA NIRO EX; PHEV
KIA NIRO EX PREMIUM; BEV
KIA NIRO WAVE; BEV
KIA NIRO S; BEV
KIA NIRO WIND; BEV
KIA EV9 LIGHT; BEV
KIA EV9 WIND; BEV
KIA EV9 GT LINE; BEV
KIA EV6 GT; BEV
KIA EV6 GT LINE~LIGHT; BEV
JEEP WRANGLER RUBICON 4XE; PHEV
JEEP WRANGLER 4XE; PHEV
JEEP WRANGLER HIGH ALTITUDE 4~SAHARA 4XE; PHEV
JEEP WRANGLER UNLIMI RUBICON 4XE; PHEV
JEEP WRANGLER UNLIMI SAHARA 4XE; PHEV
JEEP GRAND CHEROKEE TRAILHAWK 4XE; PHEV
JEEP GRAND CHEROKEE OVERLAND 4XE; PHEV
JEEP GRAND CHEROKEE SUMMIT 4XE; PHEV
JAGU I−PACE HSE; BEV
HYUN TUCSON SEL; PHEV
HYUN TUCSON LIMITED; PHEV
HYUN SANTA FE SEL; PHEV
HYUN SANTA FE LIMITED; PHEV
HYUN KONA LIMITED; BEV
HYUN KONA SE; BEV
HYUN KONA SEL; BEV
HYUN IONIQ LIMITED; PHEV
HYUN IONIQ SE; PHEV
HYUN IONIQ SEL; PHEV
HYUN IONIQ 6 SE; BEV
HYUN IONIQ 6 LIMITED; BEV
HYUN IONIQ 6 SEL; BEV
HYUN IONIQ 5 SE; BEV
HYUN IONIQ 5 LIMITED; BEV
HYUN IONIQ 5 SEL; BEV
GENS GV70 BASE; BEV
GENS GV60 STANDARD; BEV
GENS GV60 ADVANCED; BEV
GENS GV60 PERFORMANCE; BEV
FORD MUSTANG MACH−E CALIFORNIA ROUT; BEV
FORD MUSTANG MACH−E GT; BEV
FORD MUSTANG MACH−E SELECT; BEV
FORD MUSTANG MACH−E PREMIUM; BEV
FORD F150 LIGHTNING PRO; BEV
FORD ESCAPE −; PHEV
FISR OCEAN EXTREME; BEV
FISR OCEAN OCEAN ONE; BEV
DODG HORNET R/T; PHEV
CHRY PACIFICA HYBRID PINNACLE; PHEV
CHRY PACIFICA HYBRID TOURING; PHEV
CHRY PACIFICA HYBRID LIMITED; PHEV
CHEV BOLT EV 1LT; BEV
CHEV BOLT EV 2LT; BEV
CHEV BOLT EUV LT; BEV
CHEV BOLT EUV PREMIER; BEV
CADI LYRIQ TECH; BEV
CADI LYRIQ SPORT; BEV
CADI LYRIQ LUXURY; BEV
BMW X5 XDRIVE45E~XDRIVE50E; PHEV
BMW IX M60; BEV
BMW IX XDRIVE50; BEV
BMW I7 EDRIVE50; BEV
BMW I7 XDRIVE60; BEV
BMW I5 EDRIVE 40; BEV
BMW I5 M60; BEV
BMW I4~I4 M50 −~M50; BEV
BMW I4~I4 EDRIVE40 −~EDRIVE 40; BEV
BMW I4~I4 EDRIVE35 −~EDRIVE 35; BEV
BMW I4 XDRIVE 40; BEV
BMW 530XE −; PHEV
BMW 530E −; PHEV
BMW 330XE −; PHEV
BMW 330E −; PHEV
AUDI RS E−TRON GT −; BEV
AUDI Q8 E−TRON SPORTBACK PREST; BEV
AUDI Q8 E−TRON PRESTIGE; BEV
AUDI E−TRON CHRONOS; BEV
AUDI Q8 E−TRON SPORTBACK PREMI; BEV
AUDI Q8 E−TRON PREMIUM; BEV
AUDI Q8 E−TRON PREMIUM PLUS; BEV
AUDI Q5 E PREMIUM 55; PHEV
AUDI Q5 E PRESTIGE 55; PHEV
AUDI Q5 E PREMIUM PLUS 55; PHEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON PREMIUM PLUS S−; BEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON SPORTBACK PREST; BEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON PRESTIGE; BEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON PREMIUM; BEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON SPORTBACK PREMI; BEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON PREMIUM PLUS; BEV
AUDI E−TRON GT PRESTIGE; BEV
AUDI E−TRON GT PREMIUM PLUS; BEV
ALFA TONALE VELOCE; PHEV
ALFA TONALE TI; PHEV
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
Dec 2023
Notes: This figure has one row for each EV submodel in the data, and one column for each month of the
sample. A cell is shaded if the submodel has more than 25 new registrations in that month.
96


===== [PAGE 99] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A5: Phase-In and Phase-Out Periods by Submodel
TESL MODEL Y −; BEV
TESL MODEL 3 −; BEV
TESL MODEL X −; BEV
TESL MODEL S −; BEV
VOLK ID.4 PRO S~PRO S PLUS; BEV
FORD MUSTANG MACH−E PREMIUM; BEV
KIA EV6 GT LINE~LIGHT; BEV
BMW X5 XDRIVE45E~XDRIVE50E; PHEV
JEEP WRANGLER HIGH ALTITUDE 4~SAHARA 4XE; PHEV
CHEV BOLT EUV PREMIER; BEV
FORD F150 LIGHTNING PRO; BEV
CHEV BOLT EUV LT; BEV
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
TOYT RAV4 PRIME XSE; PHEV
HYUN IONIQ 5 SEL; BEV
JEEP WRANGLER UNLIMI SAHARA 4XE; PHEV
RIVA R1S ADVENTURE; BEV
BMW IX XDRIVE50; BEV
TOYT PRIUS PRIME LE~SE; PHEV
JEEP WRANGLER 4XE; PHEV
TOYT RAV4 PRIME SE; PHEV
KIA SORENTO SX PRESTIGE; PHEV
HYUN IONIQ 5 LIMITED; BEV
FORD MUSTANG MACH−E SELECT; BEV
FORD MUSTANG MACH−E GT; BEV
4
6
8
10
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
JEEP WRANGLER RUBICON 4XE; PHEV
VOLK ID.4 PRO; BEV
VOLV XC90 ULTIMATE; PHEV
RIVA R1T ADVENTURE; BEV
BMW I4~I4 EDRIVE40 −~EDRIVE 40; BEV
CHEV BOLT EV 2LT; BEV
FORD ESCAPE −; PHEV
HYUN IONIQ 5 SE; BEV
JEEP WRANGLER UNLIMI RUBICON 4XE; PHEV
TOYT BZ4X XLE; BEV
BMW I4~I4 EDRIVE35 −~EDRIVE 35; BEV
CHEV BOLT EV 1LT; BEV
4
6
8
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
VOLV XC40 RECHARGE −; BEV
VOLV XC60 ULTIMAT; PHEVE
SUBA SOLTERRA PREMIUM; BEV
VOLV XC90 PLUS; PHEV
MNNI COOPER SE; BEV
NISS LEAF SV PLUS; BEV
NISS LEAF S; BEV
CHRY PACIFICA HYBRID LIMITED; PHEV
CHRY PACIFICA HYBRID TOURING; PHEV
HYUN IONIQ 6 SEL; BEV
BMW I4~I4 M50 −~M50; BEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON PREMIUM PLUS; BEV
4
5
6
7
8
9
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
RIVA R1S LAUNCH EDITION; BEV
VOLV C40 RECHARGE ULTIMA; BEV
NISS ARIYA EVOLVE+; BEV
CADI LYRIQ LUXURY; BEV
FORD MUSTANG MACH−E CALIFORNIA ROUT; BEV
VOLV XC60 PLUS; PHEV
MERZ EQB 300 4MATIC; BEV
JEEP GRAND CHEROKEE SUMMIT 4XE; PHEV
PLSR 2 −; BEV
AUDI Q8 E−TRON PREMIUM PLUS; BEV
LEXS NX 450H; PHEV
JEEP GRAND CHEROKEE OVERLAND 4XE; PHEV
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
KIA SPORTAGE X−LINE PRESTIGE; PHEV
KIA NIRO EX; PHEV
HYUN TUCSON LIMITED; PHEV
LEXS RZ 450E; BEV
KIA NIRO WIND; BEV
KIA NIRO S; BEV
HYUN SANTA FE LIMITED; PHEV
RIVA R1T LAUNCH EDITION; BEV
AUDI Q5 E PREMIUM PLUS 55; PHEV
MERZ EQS SUV 580 4MATIC; BEV
NISS ARIYA ENGAGE; BEV
AUDI Q8 E−TRON PREMIUM; BEV
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
KIA SPORTAGE X LINE; PHEV
BMW 330E −; PHEV
MITS OUTLANDER SEL; PHEV
BMW 330XE −; PHEV
HYUN IONIQ 6 LIMITED; BEV
AUDI Q8 E−TRON SPORTBACK PREMI; BEV
MERZ EQS SUV 450+; BEV
JEEP GRAND CHEROKEE TRAILHAWK 4XE; PHEV
CHRY PACIFICA HYBRID PINNACLE; PHEV
MERZ EQS SEDAN 450+; BEV
PORS TAYCAN −; BEV
LINC CORSAIR GRAND TOURING; PHEV
4
5
6
7
8
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
MERZ EQS SEDAN 580 4MATIC; BEV
HYUN KONA SEL; BEV
KIA NIRO WAVE; BEV
BMW I7 XDRIVE60; BEV
MAZD CX−90 PREMIUM PLUS; PHEV
HYUN KONA SE; BEV
VOLK ID.4 S; BEV
LINC AVIATOR GRAND TOURING; PHEV
MERZ EQB 250+; BEV
PORS TAYCAN 4S; BEV
AUDI E−TRON GT PREMIUM PLUS; BEV
HYUN KONA LIMITED; BEV
3
4
5
6
7
8
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
GENS GV60 PERFORMANCE; BEV
BMW IX M60; BEV
HYUN TUCSON SEL; PHEV
NISS LEAF SV; BEV
BMW 530E −; PHEV
MERZ GLE 450E 4MATIC; PHEV
MERZ EQS SUV 450 4MATIC; BEV
HYUN SANTA FE SEL; PHEV
VOLV C40 RECHARGE PLUS; BEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON SPORTBACK PREMI; BEV
AUDI Q5 E PRESTIGE 55; PHEV
KIA SORENTO SX; PHEV
3
4
5
6
7
8
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
KIA NIRO EX PREMIUM; BEV
PORS TAYCAN GTS; BEV
NISS ARIYA PLATINUM +; BEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON PREMIUM; BEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON PRESTIGE; BEV
AUDI E−TRON CHRONOS; BEV
KIA EV6 GT; BEV
KIA NIRO SX TOURING; PHEV
MAZD CX−90 PREMIUM; PHEV
MITS OUTLANDER SE; PHEV
AUDI E−TRON GT PRESTIGE; BEV
PORS CAYENNE E−HYBRID; PHEV
4
5
6
7
8
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
MERZ EQB 350 4MATIC; BEV
BMW 530XE −; PHEV
GENS GV60 ADVANCED; BEV
NISS LEAF S PLUS; BEV
GENS GV70 BASE; BEV
FISR OCEAN OCEAN ONE; BEV
AUDI Q5 E PREMIUM 55; PHEV
CADI LYRIQ SPORT; BEV
NISS ARIYA VENTURE+; BEV
MAZD CX−90 PREFERRED; PHEV
HYUN IONIQ 6 SE; BEV
MNNI COOPER S E COUNTRYMAN; PHEV
4
5
6
7
8
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
AUDI Q8 E−TRON PRESTIGE; BEV
KIA NIRO LXS; PHEV
VOLK ID.4 −; BEV
BMW I5 M60; BEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON SPORTBACK PREST; BEV
NISS LEAF SL PLUS; BEV
BMW I4 XDRIVE 40; BEV
PORS TAYCAN CROSS TURISMO 4; BEV
MERZ EQS SEDAN 450 4MATIC; BEV
ALFA TONALE TI; PHEV
LUCI AIR PURE; BEV
BMW I5 EDRIVE 40; BEV
4
5
6
7
8
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
VOLV S60 T8 RECHARGE R−D; PHEV
DODG HORNET R/T; PHEV
ALFA TONALE VELOCE; PHEV
LUCI AIR TOURING; BEV
LEXS RX 450H+ LUXURY; PHEV
KIA NIRO EX PREMIUM; PHEV
AUDI RS E−TRON GT −; BEV
CADI LYRIQ TECH; BEV
KIA EV9 GT LINE; BEV
AUDI Q8 E−TRON SPORTBACK PREST; BEV
PORS TAYCAN TURBO; BEV
AUDI Q4 E−TRON PREMIUM PLUS S−; BEV
4
5
6
7
8
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
PORS CAYENNE E HYBRID COUPE; PHEV
LUCI AIR GRAND TOURING; BEV
BMW I7 EDRIVE50; BEV
HYUN IONIQ SEL; PHEV
HYUN IONIQ SE; PHEV
KIA EV9 WIND; BEV
JAGU I−PACE HSE; BEV
VOLV S60 T8 RECHARGE INS; PHEV
MAZD MX−30 PREMIUM PLUS; BEV
HYUN IONIQ LIMITED; PHEV
FISR OCEAN EXTREME; BEV
KIA EV9 LIGHT; BEV
GENS GV60 STANDARD; BEV
VNFS VF 8 PLUS; BEV
4
5
6
7
2022−01
2022−07
2023−01
2023−07
2024−01
year_month
Natural log of registrations
Phase−in
Phase−out
Stable
Notes: This figure presents registrations by submodel, with one line for each EV submodel in our data;
we arrange them into subplots to aid in seeing the dynamics of each series. Each panel contains a group
of submodels, arranged by group in decreasing order of total registrations. Red and blue lines represent
phase-in and phase-out periods at the beginning and end of a submodel’s life. To define these periods, we
construct ¯qj as submodel j’s sample average monthly registrations in months with non-zero registrations.
Phase-in periods are consecutive months beginning with zero registrations and ending when registrations
first exceed ¯qj/2. Analogously, phase-out periods are consecutive months ending when registrations reach
zero and beginning when registrations last exceed ¯qj/2.
97


===== [PAGE 100] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A6: Income Distributions for EV Buyers in 2022/2023 and 30D Tax Credit
Claimants in 2021
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
0
100 200
500
1,000
> 1,000
Income ($000s)
Cumulative share
NVES (EV buyers)
SOI (30D credits claimed)
Notes: The red line shows the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) for
taxpayers claiming the Section 30D credit for tax year 2021, using data from the IRS Statistics of Income
(2023). The grey line shows the CDF of self-reported household income for people who bought new EVs
in 2022 and 2023, using data from the National Vehicle Experience Survey. The IRA requires that to be
eligible to claim the credit in 2023 and after, individual buyers must have AGI below $300,000 for married
couples filing jointly, $225,000 for household heads, or $150,000 for all other taxpayers. The vertical lines
reflect those income thresholds.
Figure A7: Example of Promotional Material Advertising $7,500 Lease Bonus
Notes: Representative screenshot showing $7,500 promotion on EV leases. Observed on the Mercedes-Benz
website, August 2023.
98


===== [PAGE 101] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A8: Changes in Relative Lease Prices and Lease Shares from October-December
2022 to July-August 2023 by Make
−8
−4
0
0%
25%
50%
Lease share change
Relative lease price change ($000s)
Make
Chevrolet
Tesla
Jeep
BMW
Toyota
Ford
Kia
Volvo
Volkswagen
Hyundai
Notes: This figure presents the differences (from July-August 2023 vs. October-December 2022) in relative
lease prices and lease shares, for the top-10 selling EV brands.
Figure A9: Lease Share Trends Among Income Eligibility Groups
0
20
40
60
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
Lease share (%)
Household Income
Above 30D income
threshold
Below 30D income
threshold
Vehicle eligibility,
summer 2023
Eligible for
purchase credit
Ineligible for
purchase credit
Notes: This figure presents quarterly lease shares among EVs in the NVES survey, separately shown for
households above and below the income threshold for 30D credits and for vehicles which were eligible and
ineligible for 30D credits in July and August 2023. This aggregation is slightly different than that shown
in Figure 5, as we here group EVs only on their purchase credit eligibility as of summer 2023. Households’
responses are aggregated using the survey weights and household-level eligibility is determined using self-
reported household income and marital status.
99


===== [PAGE 102] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A10: Purchase Price Event Study with Reweighted Controls
Excluded Aug 2022
Months after Sep 2022
Purchase price ($000s)
−6
−2
2
6
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
Excluded Aug 2022
Months after May 2023
Purchase price ($000s)
−6
−2
2
6
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
Excluded/reduced Apr 2023
Notes: This figure presents the γe
r coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals from equation (2). Eligi-
bility groups are described in Figure 1. This parallels Figure A13, except that we also re-weight the control
observations (GVs) to match the average pre-IRA EV price.
Figure A11: Lease Price Event Study with Reweighted Controls
Months after Jan 2023
Lease price minus purchase price ($000s)
−10
−5
0
5
−5
0
5
10
Excluded Aug 2022
Months after Jan 2023
Lease price minus purchase price ($000s)
−10
−5
0
5
−5
0
5
10
Included Jan 2023
Other EVs
Months after Jan 2023
Lease price minus purchase price ($000s)
−10
−5
0
5
−5
0
5
10
Other EVs
Notes: This figure presents the γe
r coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals from equation (2). Eligi-
bility groups are described in Figure 1. This parallels Figure 4, except that we also re-weight the control
observations (GVs) to match the average pre-IRA EV price.
100


===== [PAGE 103] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A12: Lease Share Event Study with Reweighted Controls
Months after Jan 2023
Lease share (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
−5
0
5
10
Excluded Aug 2022
Months after Jan 2023
Lease share (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
−5
0
5
10
Included Jan 2023
Months after Jan 2023
Lease share (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
−5
0
5
10
Other EVs
Notes: This figure presents the γe
r coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals from equation (2). Eligi-
bility groups are described in Figure 1. This parallels Figure 5, except that we also re-weight the control
observations (GVs) to match the average pre-IRA EV price.
101


===== [PAGE 104] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A13: Purchase Price Trends Associated with Eligibility Changes
(a) Trends by Eligibility Group
50
55
60
65
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
Purchase price ($000s)
Eligibility
Excluded Aug 2022
Excluded/reduced Apr 2023
Other EVs
(b) Event Study Estimates
Excluded Aug 2022
Months after Sep 2022
Purchase price ($000s)
−6
−2
2
6
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
Excluded Aug 2022
Months after May 2023
Purchase price ($000s)
−6
−2
2
6
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
Excluded/reduced Apr 2023
Notes: Panel (a) presents purchase price indexes constructed by computing the January 2023 weighted
averages for each eligibility group and then recursively adding the sales-weighted average changes for all
submodels available in each previous or subsequent month. Panel (b) presents the γe
r coefficients and 95
percent confidence intervals from equation (2). Eligibility groups are described in Figure 1; the Other EVs
group includes all EVs not part of either the Excluded August 2023 or the Excluded/reduced April 2023
groups. In both panels, we weight submodels by average monthly sales in months when the submodel was
available.
102


===== [PAGE 105] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A14: Registration Trends Associated with Eligibility Changes
(a) Trends by Eligibility Group
6
7
8
9
10
Jan 2022
Jul 2022
Jan 2023
Jul 2023
Natural log of registrations
Eligibility
Excluded Aug 2022
Included Jan 2023
Excluded/reduced Apr 2023
(b) Event Study Estimates
Excluded Aug 2022
Months after Sep 2022
Natural log of registrations
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
Included Jan 2023
Months after Jan 2023
Natural log of registrations
−1.0
−0.6
−0.2
0.2
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
Excluded/reduced Apr 2023
Months after May 2023
Natural log of registrations
0.0
0.5
1.0
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
Notes: Panel (a) presents ln(registrations) indexes constructed by computing the January 2023 weighted
averages for each eligibility group and then recursively adding the sales-weighted average changes for all
submodels available in each previous or subsequent month. Panel (b) presents the γe
r coefficients and 95
percent confidence intervals from equation (2). Eligibility groups are described in Figure 1. In both panels,
we weight submodels by average monthly sales in months when the submodel was available.
103


===== [PAGE 106] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A15: Nested Logit Structure
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
EV
GV
Outside option
ClassEV
1
ClassEV
N
ClassGV
1
ClassGV
N
1EV
NEV 1GV
NGV
Buy
Lease
Buy
Lease
Powertain/purchase
decision
Vehicle class
Submodel
Purchase type
Figure A16: Model Fit along Income Heterogeneity
(a) Cumulative Share of Market
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
<$25k
$25k−$30k
$30k−$40k
$40k−$50k
$50k−$75k
$75k−$100k
$100k−$200k
$200k−$300k
$300k−$500k
$500k−$1M
$1M−$2M
>$2M
Income
Cumulative share of market by income bin (%)
EV market
Total market
Data source
NVES
Model
(b) Average Transaction Price
30
40
50
60
70
<$25k
$25k−$30k
$30k−$40k
$40k−$50k
$50k−$75k
$75k−$100k
$100k−$200k
$200k−$300k
$300k−$500k
$500k−$1M
$1M−$2M
>$2M
Income
Average price ($000s)
Data source
NVES
Model
Market share (%)
10
20
30
(c) Lease Propensity
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
<$25k
$25k−$30k
$30k−$40k
$40k−$50k
$50k−$75k
$75k−$100k
$100k−$200k
$200k−$300k
$300k−$500k
$500k−$1M
$1M−$2M
>$2M
Income
Lease share by income bin (%)
Data source
NVES
Model
Market share (%)
10
20
30
(d) EV Propensity
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
<$25k
$25k−$30k
$30k−$40k
$40k−$50k
$50k−$75k
$75k−$100k
$100k−$200k
$200k−$300k
$300k−$500k
$500k−$1M
$1M−$2M
>$2M
Income
EV market share by income bin (%)
Data source
NVES
Model
Market share (%)
10
20
30
Notes: This figure presents a comparison across the full type distribution between model-implied outcomes
and the NVES survey data. These four outcomes correspond to the four moments used in demand estimation.
We do not target the full distribution, instead collapsing the data into a comparison between households
above and below $300,000 in reported income as discussed in the text.
The dot sizes reflect each bin’s
estimated share of the vehicle market from the model.
104


===== [PAGE 107] =====

Online Appendix
The Effects of “Buy American”
Figure A17: Distribution of Implied Marginal Cost and Markup for EVs and GVs
(a) Marginal Costs
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
0
25
50
75
100
Marginal cost ($000s)
Share of registrations by powertrain
Vehicle type
Electric
Gasoline
(b) Markups
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
0
5
10
15
Markup ($000s)
Share of registrations by powertrain
Vehicle type
Electric
Gasoline
Notes: This figure presents the distribution across submodels of purchase- and lease-specific marginal costs
and markups implied by firms’ first-order condition in equation (8), weighting each choices registrations in
July and August 2023. Markups are computed in the equilibrium where all EV subsidies are set to zero.
105
