

===== [PAGE 1] =====

 
 
Alessandro Gavazza, Alessandro Lizzeri, Nikita Roketskiy 
A quantitative analysis of the used-car 
market 
Article (Accepted version) 
(Refereed) 
Original citation: 
Gavazza, Alessandro, Lizzeri, Alessandro and Roketskiy, Nikita (2014) A quantitative analysis of 
the used-car market. American Economic Review. pp. 1-44. ISSN 0002-8282 (In Press)  
 
© 2014 American Economic Association 
 
This version available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/55720/ 
 
Available in LSE Research Online: August 2014 
 
LSE has developed LSE Research Online so that users may access research output of the 
School. Copyright © and Moral Rights for the papers on this site are retained by the individual 
authors and/or other copyright owners. Users may download and/or print one copy of any 
article(s) in LSE Research Online to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research. 
You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities 
or any commercial gain. You may freely distribute the URL (http://eprints.lse.ac.uk) of the LSE 
Research Online website.  
 
This document is the author’s final accepted version of the journal article. There may be 
differences between this version and the published version.  You are advised to consult the 
publisher’s version if you wish to cite from it. 
 
 
 


===== [PAGE 2] =====

A Quantitative Analysis of the Used-Car Market∗
Alessandro Gavazza¶
Alessandro Lizzeri§
Nikita Roketskiy∥
January 2014
Abstract
We quantitatively investigate the allocative and welfare eﬀects of secondary markets
for cars. An important source of gains from trade in these markets is the heterogeneity
in the willingness to pay for higher-quality (newer) goods, but transaction costs are
an impediment to instantaneous trade. Calibration of the model successfully matches
several aggregate features of the U.S. and French used-car markets.
Counterfactual
analyses show that transaction costs have a large eﬀect on volume of trade, allocations,
and the primary market. Aggregate eﬀects on consumer surplus and welfare are relatively
small, but the eﬀect on lower-valuation households can be large.
∗We are grateful to Chad Syverson, four anonymous referees and the editor, and many seminar audiences
for insightful comments, and to Alistair Wilson for excellent research assistance. NSF support is gratefully
acknowledged. The authors acknowledge the use of the UCL Legion High Performance Computing Facility
(Legion@UCL), and associated support services, in the completion of this work.
¶Department of Economics, London School of Economics. Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, United
Kingdom. Email: a.gavazza@lse.ac.uk.
§Department of Economics, New York University, 19 West 4th Street, New York, NY 10012-1119, United
States. Email: alessandro.lizzeri@nyu.edu.
∥Department of Economics, University College London, 30 Gordon Street, London, WC1H 0AX, United
Kingdom. Email: n.roketskiy@ucl.ac.uk.


===== [PAGE 3] =====

1
Introduction
Secondary markets play an important allocative role for some durable goods. For instance,
in the U.S., the number of used-car transactions is approximately three times as large as the
number of new-car transactions. Furthermore, the dispersion of used-car prices (measured by
the coeﬃcient of variation) is approximately ﬁve times as large as the dispersion of new-car
prices, suggesting that secondary markets play an important role in broadening the spectrum
of goods available to consumers.1
The amount of activity in secondary markets varies dramatically across goods, with some
markets extremely active (e.g., cars, aircraft) and others much less so (e.g., household appli-
ances, computers). More surprisingly, the amount of activity also varies substantially across
diﬀerent countries for the same goods. For instance, the American used-car market is much
more active than the French market. What forces are responsible for these diﬀerences? What
are the consequences for prices and allocations, for producers’ proﬁts and consumers’ welfare?
How do these diﬀerences in activity aﬀect the extent of variety available to consumers? Can
some of the observed diﬀerences in the primary markets across goods and countries be due, in
part, to the underlying causes of the diﬀerences in activity in the secondary markets? These
are some of the questions that this paper addresses.2
We present a simple model of durable-goods markets to tackle these issues.
As in all
markets, activity in secondary markets arises because of some gains from trade between coun-
terparties. In the car market, an important source of such gains from trade is heterogeneity
in the willingness to pay for quality: high-willingness-to-pay consumers sell used units when
they upgrade to a new unit.3 Transaction costs are an impediment to instantaneous (i.e., 100
percent) trade.4 The extent of trade depends on the degree of heterogeneity in preferences.
We quantitatively investigate how the distribution of non-durable consumption contributes
to this heterogeneity by calibrating our model to match the aggregate volume of trade in the
used-car market. Despite its simplicity, the model ﬁts the data very well.
1The coeﬃcient of variation is calculated from the National Automobile Dealers Association (NADA) Car
Price Guide.
2Empirical studies of secondary markets include the following markets: cars (Porter and Sattler, 1999;
Adda and Cooper, 2000; Stolyarov, 2002; Esteban and Shum, 2007; Chen, Esteban and Shum, 2013; and
Schiraldi, 2011); truck tractors (Bond, 1983); commercial aircraft (Pulvino, 1998; Gavazza, 2011a and 2011b);
business aircraft (Gilligan, 2004; Gavazza, 2013); and capital equipment (Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2009).
3There are, of course, other reasons for trade. For instance, the ideal car depends on household size, so
changes in the number of children may lead some households to trade in their sedan to purchase a minivan.
We could, in principle, add such characteristics to our model.
4Jovanovic (1998 and 2009) considers frictionless reassignment in a vintage model.
1


===== [PAGE 4] =====

We then use the model to perform several counterfactuals, with the purpose of understand-
ing the functioning of secondary markets and their impact on the market for new goods. First,
we examine the eﬀects of transaction costs by comparing two polar cases with the baseline
calibrated model: perfectly functioning secondary markets with zero transaction costs and
complete shutdown of secondary markets with prohibitive transaction costs. Naturally, we
expect any changes in secondary markets to aﬀect primary markets. Thus, the supply re-
sponse of new-goods producers is an important element determining the welfare consequences
of secondary markets’ frictions. We consider two extreme supply scenarios that help highlight
how primary markets adjust: 1) a perfectly elastic supply—i.e., the price of new cars does not
respond to changes in transaction costs, but the quantity does; and 2) a perfectly inelastic
supply—i.e., the quantity of new cars does not respond to changes in transaction costs, but
the price does. We believe that these counterfactuals are useful to understand the importance
of transaction costs for manufacturers, since they indicate that either output or prices change
when transaction costs change, even in an oligopolistic market for new cars.5
Three key economic forces aﬀect allocations and welfare in our counterfactuals with diﬀer-
ent transaction costs relative to the baseline case: 1) Higher (lower) transaction costs have the
partial-equilibrium direct eﬀect of destroying (freeing) resources, thereby aﬀecting households’
willingness to pay because they obtain diﬀerent net resale prices; 2) lower (higher) transaction
costs have the partial-equilibrium indirect eﬀect of allowing a ﬁner (coarser) matching between
households’ preferences and the quality of their cars; and 3) the two previous forces feed into
the general-equilibrium eﬀects of changing new- and used-car prices and/or quantities relative
to the baseline case.
Overall, we ﬁnd that the impact of transaction costs on allocations in both the secondary
market and in the market for new goods is large. In contrast, the eﬀects on aggregate welfare
are small, although the distribution of these eﬀects is uneven, with low-valuation households
suﬀering large losses from increases in transaction costs. For instance, if transaction costs
are large enough to shut down secondary markets, the aggregate consumer-surplus loss equals
two to six percent of the aggregate baseline consumer surplus (in which transaction costs
are calibrated to the data), depending on the elasticity of new-car supply. However, some
households with preferences below the median suﬀer surplus losses larger than 50 percent of
their baseline surplus. Aggregate welfare changes are smaller because, due to heterogeneity,
the highest-valuation households have disproportionate weights in the calculation of aggre-
5Most of our analysis focuses on a single quality of new cars to simplify the way in which secondary markets
expand the array of goods available to consumers, but we also consider how the forces that we discuss operate
when new cars of diﬀerent qualities are available (see Section 5.1.2).
2


===== [PAGE 5] =====

gate surplus. These households have the smallest surplus loss when transaction costs increase
because several margins of adjustment allow them to reduce the eﬀects of transaction costs—
for example, they can scrap their cars if resale is prohibitively expensive—and they do not
suﬀer much from the higher costs that accompany such adjustments. However, since transac-
tion costs lower the total quantity of cars by increasing scrappage, low-preference households
disproportionately suﬀer from this reduced availability of cars.
These counterfactual analyses also reveal some additional intriguing ﬁndings. For example,
we ﬁnd that either new-car output or new-car prices (depending on whether new-car supply is
elastic or inelastic) is non-monotonic in transaction costs, with either output or prices going
up relative to the baseline case. This non-monotonicity is due to the diﬀerent quantitative
magnitudes of the key economic forces for diﬀerent levels of transaction costs. When transac-
tion costs are zero, frictionless secondary markets lead to much ﬁner matching of qualities to
households’ valuations, thereby raising high-valuation households’ willingness to pay for new
cars. When supply is perfectly elastic (inelastic), the quantity (price) of new cars produced
must increase. When transaction costs are prohibitive, however, used-car markets shut down
completely, so the only way for households to upgrade quality is to scrap their used units.
Indeed, scrappage increases substantially, with cars lasting only two thirds as long as in the
baseline scenario. This increased scrappage feeds into a substantially higher demand for new
cars and, hence, higher output or price, depending on the elasticity of supply.
We further consider the allocative and welfare eﬀects of a scrappage policy that forces
households to scrap their cars earlier than they otherwise would. Scrappage policies have
been introduced in a number of countries, and the policy that we consider is closest to the
Japanese shaken system of tough emission inspections that induces a particularly young ﬂeet
of cars in Japan.6 Speciﬁcally, we impose that households have to scrap their cars when they
reach the (approximate) scrappage age that keeps the total stock of cars equal to the stock in
the counterfactual with prohibitive transaction costs, so this choice facilitates the comparison
between these counterfactuals. However, two substantive diﬀerences arise between these two
counterfactuals. First, secondary markets are active when there is a scrappage policy, but
they are not when transaction costs are prohibitive. Second, households’ scrappage decisions
are heterogeneous when transaction costs are prohibitive, with higher-valuation households
scrapping their cars substantially earlier than lower-valuation households. However, this het-
erogeneity does not arise under the scrappage policy since all cars have positive net resale
6As we explain in Section 5.2, our steady-state model is less well suited to an analysis of temporary policies
such as cash for clunkers. See Adda and Cooper (2000) for such an analysis that does not, however, take into
account the eﬀects of secondary markets.
3


===== [PAGE 6] =====

values, and, thus, no households scrap them before they reach the imposed scrappage age.
We ﬁnd that this scrappage policy has minor eﬀects on aggregate welfare relative to the
baseline case, especially in the case of elastic supply, although the welfare losses are again
large for low-valuation households. Moreover, we ﬁnd that welfare is higher with this scrap-
page policy than with prohibitive transaction costs, further highlighting the welfare gains of
resale markets. The reason is that the ﬁrst eﬀect—i.e., active secondary markets—allows a
ﬁner matching of relatively young vintages to high-valuation consumers, whereas the second
eﬀect—i.e., heterogeneous scrappage—allows ﬁner control of relatively low-quality cars for
low-valuation consumers. The ﬁrst eﬀect dominates because of supermodularity: More value
is created at the top of the quality distribution than is lost at the bottom.
Finally, we explore the quantitative eﬀects of heterogeneity by considering data from an-
other country, France. The distribution of non-durable consumption in France is less dispersed
than in the U.S., and the model predicts that we should observe less trade in the French used-
car market than in the U.S. market. Indeed, this is also what the data say. The magnitude
of the diﬀerence is also substantial: The average holding time is approximately 30-percent
longer in France than in the U.S. Our model quantitatively matches French aggregate statis-
tics fairly well. Of course, there are many diﬀerences between the U.S. and France beyond
the diﬀerences in the distribution of non-durable consumption. However, it is notable that
the model can account for the diﬀerences in the aggregate car-market data on which we focus.
Another interesting consequence of lower heterogeneity is that car prices are ﬂatter in France
than in the U.S., starting with a lower new-car price and ending with higher used-car prices
in France for the oldest vintages.
2
Related Literature
This article contributes to two main strands of the literature. First, the theoretical literature
on consumer durable goods has investigated the role of secondary markets in allocating new
and used goods (Rust, 1985; Anderson and Ginsburgh, 1994; Waldman 1997, 2003; Hendel
and Lizzeri, 1999a,b; Stolyarov, 2002). The ﬁrst part of our paper is close to Stolyarov (2002),
which investigates resale rates across diﬀerent car vintages. We contribute to this strand of the
literature by providing a quantitative analysis of the allocative and welfare eﬀects of secondary
markets, and by evaluating policies that aﬀect secondary markets.
Second, a series of papers analyzes car markets. Many inﬂuential papers analyze product
diﬀerentiation and consumers’ choices among new cars (Bresnahan, 1981; Berry, Levinsohn
and Pakes, 1995; Goldberg, 1995; Petrin, 2002) or manufacturers’ pricing (Verboven, 1996;
4


===== [PAGE 7] =====

Goldberg and Verboven, 2001), but they do not consider used goods and secondary markets.
Wang (2008) incorporates the durability of the good in consumers’ choice of new cars, and
Schiraldi (2011) considers new and used cars in consumers’ choice sets, but neither analyzes the
equilibrium in the market. Eberly (1994) and Attanasio (2000) study households’ adjustments
of their vehicles’ stocks in partial-equilibrium. Hence, relative to all these contributions, our
equilibrium model is better suited to address the general-equilibrium eﬀects of heterogeneity
and secondary markets and of policies, such as scrappage policies, that impact durable-goods
markets. The closest papers to ours are Chen, Esteban and Shum (2013) and Yurko (2012).
The main diﬀerence with Chen, Esteban and Shum (2013) is that they focus on the eﬀects
of the secondary market on the primary market: They consider an oligopoly model with
forward-looking ﬁrms, and they compare the eﬀects of secondary markets both for the case
of commitment and for the case in which manufacturers lack commitment.
Instead, our
main focus is on the allocative and welfare role of secondary markets: We consider a model
with richer household heterogeneity and greater vertical variety of used goods. Similarly, the
contemporaneous paper by Yurko (2012) investigates the role of heterogeneity in car markets,
but does not consider the allocative and welfare eﬀects of secondary markets, as we do by
performing the counterfactual analyses in Section 5.7
3
Model
3.1
Assumptions
We modify a model of vertical product diﬀerentiation, which has become a standard way
to model secondary markets (see, for instance, Rust, 1985; Anderson and Ginsburgh, 1994;
Hendel and Lizzeri, 1999a and 1999b). Stolyarov (2002) numerically solved such a model
and obtained some interesting patterns for secondary markets with transaction costs. We
extend Stolyarov’s analysis to incorporate some features that are important in the data, such
as multiple cars per household and the combination of exogenous and endogenous scrappage.
We then evaluate how this simple model can account for some aggregate features of the data,
while abstracting from some important features of car markets, such as horizontal product
diﬀerentiation.
The ﬁrst step is to obtain the equilibrium in the car market for any given level of new-car
output. In every period, a constant (exogenous) ﬂow x of new cars enters the market. We
7Yurko’s (2012) model also assumes an exogenous functional form for prices, whereas we impose no re-
strictions on prices.
5


===== [PAGE 8] =====

will infer this output from the data and, as will become clear, in our baseline model, it would
be equivalent to assume that the unit cost of cars is equal to p0 and that the car industry is
perfectly competitive, so that any quantity of new cars can be supplied at price p0.8
New cars are homogeneous,9 with quality q0, and depreciate over time: A car of age a is
of quality qa, with qa > qa+1.10 In each period, each car “dies” with exogenous probability
γ, independent of the age of the car; we interpret this exogenous “death” as the result of
accidents or other events that induce households to scrap their cars. All “surviving” cars
are (endogenously) scrapped at time T. For expositional simplicity, we describe the case in
which, in equilibrium, all agents choose to scrap at the same time T, as this is the relevant
case for our baseline calibration.11 The steady-state total mass of cars X is equal to X =
PT
t=0 x (1 −γ)t = x1−(1−γ)T +1
γ
.
A majority of U.S. households own more than one car (see Section 4.1). We need the model
to capture this feature of the data for two reasons: ﬁrst, because, there are more cars than
households, so assuming unit demand would not be consistent with secondary-market activity
(we discuss this in more detail later); and, second, because we want to contrast the U.S. with
France, where the number of cars per household is lower. However, allowing households to
hold more than one car signiﬁcantly complicates the numerical computation, so we do not
allow for more than two cars. Speciﬁcally, we assume that each household has a preference
parameter θ that determines the ﬂow of utility that the household enjoys from its cars. A
household with preference θ and with two cars of vintages a and b enjoys a per-period ﬂow
of utility equal to θ max{qa, qb} −c from its ﬁrst (better) car, and αθ min{qa, qb} −c from
its second (worse) car. The parameter α ∈(0, 1) captures the lower valuation for the second
car, and the parameter c is a per-period holding (i.e., maintenance) cost, independent of
car quality. The role of the holding cost is to generate a reasonable scrappage age.12 The
preference parameter θ is distributed in the population according to the non-degenerate c.d.f.
8In our counterfactuals, we consider two scenarios for supply: 1) a perfectly elastic supply, as in a perfectly
competitive industry with constant marginal cost equal to p0; and 2) a perfectly inelastic (per-period) supply
equal to x.
9We consider heterogeneous vertical qualities of new goods in Section 5.1.2. Clearly, the car market exhibits
features that we abstract from, such as horizontal diﬀerentiation among car models, as in Berry, Levinsohn,
and Pakes (1995). However, the focus of our analysis is on the replacement patterns that emerge from gains
from trade due to vertical diﬀerentiation among diﬀerent ages of a given car model.
10We can also interpret depreciation as the growing distance between older cars and the improving techno-
logical frontier of new models (e.g., air bags, electronic stability control, etc.).
11Some of our counterfactuals require aggregation of heterogeneous scrappage decisions. This is a straight-
forward extension that we omit from the main analysis to avoid cumbersome notation.
12For scrappage decisions the only relevant holding costs are those for cars close to the scrappage age.
6


===== [PAGE 9] =====

F, whereas α is distributed in the population according to the non-degenerate c.d.f. G. We
assume that for each household θ and α are independent and do not change over time.13
In order for the model to generate interesting implications for trade in the secondary
market, and to match relevant features of the data, we introduce some frictions. We assume
that there are transaction costs in the secondary market: If a household sells a car of age a,
it pays a transaction cost λa proportional to the sale price.14 The level of transaction costs
will be a key variable in some of our counterfactuals.
3.2
Household problem
A household chooses how many cars to own and, for each car, which vintage to buy and how
long to keep it. Let Vθ,α(a, b) be the value function of a household with preferences (θ, α) that,
in the current period, is enjoying cars of vintage a and b, respectively. Vθ,α(a, b) satisﬁes:
Vθ,α(a, b) = θ max{qa, qb} + αθ min{qa, qb} −cI {a < T + 1} −cI {b < T + 1}
(1)
+ β (1 −γ)2 max
a′,b′ (Vθ,α(a′, b′) −pa′ + pa+1 (1 −λa+1I{a′ ̸= a + 1})
−pb′ + pb+1 (1 −λb+1I{b′ ̸= b + 1}))
+ β (1 −γ) γ max
a′,b′ (Vθ,α(a′, b′) −pa′ + pa+1 (1 −λa+1I{a′ ̸= a + 1}) −pb′)
+ β (1 −γ) γ max
a′,b′ (Vθ,α(a′, b′) −pa′ −pb′ + pb+1 (1 −λb+1I{b′ ̸= b + 1}))
+ βγ2 max
a′,b′ (Vθ,α (a′, b′) −pa′ −pb′) ,
where we let qx ≡0 and px ≡0 for x > T mean having no car, and β is the discount factor
common to all households.
Equation (1) says that the household enjoys the current-period utility ﬂows θ max{qa, qb}−c
and αθ min{qa, qb} −c from their youngest and oldest car, respectively; recall that, if they
own no car (car qT+1 in our notation), then this ﬂow utility is zero. In the next period, one
of four possible events may happen to a household:
13We considered temporary shocks to preferences but in our computation these shocks were of negligible
importance for our calibration.
14The fact that transaction costs are paid by the sellers is immaterial: just like for taxation, equilibrium
allocations are invariant to the “statutory incidence” of transaction costs. Some dependence of transaction
costs on prices is realistic and allowing for a ﬁxed component of transaction costs does not change our qual-
itative and quantitative results. It is also possible to interpret the transaction cost as a reduced form of
adverse selection. This would give an additional reason why the percentage transaction cost would rise with
the vintage of the good since uncertainty over the quality of cars is likely to rise with the age of the car.
7


===== [PAGE 10] =====

1. With probability (1 −γ)2 , all its cars are still “alive,” and the household chooses between
replacing any car or keeping it. If the household chooses to replace the depreciated
vintage-(a + 1) car with a diﬀerent vintage-a′ car, it pays the price pa′ and receives the
price pa+1 net of the transaction costs λa+1pa+1. If the household chooses not to replace
the car, it enjoys a car of vintage a′ = a + 1, thereby avoiding any transaction costs.
2. With probability (1 −γ) γ, the household exogenously scraps its vintage-b car. It then
chooses which vintage b′ to acquire to replace the scrapped car and chooses whether to
replace the depreciated vintage-(a + 1) car with a diﬀerent vintage-a′ car.
3. With probability (1 −γ) γ, the household exogenously scraps its vintage-a car. It then
chooses which vintage a′ to acquire to replace the scrapped car and chooses whether to
replace the depreciated vintage-(b + 1) car with a diﬀerent vintage-b′ car.
4. With probability γ2, the household exogenously scraps both its cars and then chooses
which vintages a′ and b′ to purchase, if any.
At the beginning of each period, given preferences (θ, α) and currently-owned vintages a
and b, households choose policies a∗(θ, α, a, b) and b∗(θ, α, a, b) to maximize
Vθ,α(a′, b′) −pa′ + pa (1 −λaI{a′ ̸= a}) −pb′ + pb (1 −λbI{b′ ̸= b}) .
Moreover, the endogenous scrappage age T is determined by the following conditions: i) No
household chooses to keep a car of quality qT ; ii) no household buys a car of quality qT; and
iii) a car of quality qT has a price pT equal to zero.
Let h (a, b|θ, α) be the stationary distribution of holdings of cars of vintages a and b, respec-
tively, for a household with preferences θ and α. This distribution h (a, b|θ, α) is constructed
recursively as:
h
 a′, b′|θ, α

=
T+1
X
a=0
T+1
X
b=0
(1 −γ)2 I{a∗(θ, α, a + 1, b + 1) = a′, b∗(θ, α, a + 1, b + 1) = b′}h (a, b|θ, α) +
T+1
X
a=0
T+1
X
b=0
(1 −γ) γI{a∗(θ, α, a + 1, T + 1) = a′, b∗(θ, α, a + 1, T + 1) = b′}h (a, b|θ, α) +
T+1
X
a=0
T+1
X
b=0
(1 −γ) γI{a∗(θ, α, T + 1, b + 1) = a′, b∗(θ, α, T + 1, b + 1) = b′}h (a, b|θ, α) +
T+1
X
a=0
T+1
X
b=0
γ2I{a∗(θ, α, T + 1, T + 1) = a′, b∗(θ, α, T + 1, T + 1) = b′}h (a, b|θ, α) .
(2)
Equation (2) says that a household with preferences θ and α and cars of vintages a and b
faces the random exogenous scrappage of their cars. With probability (1 −γ)2, these cars do
8


===== [PAGE 11] =====

not “die” but are one year older, and the household chooses which vintages a′ and b′ to drive
in the current period. Similarly, with probability (1 −γ) γ, one car dies—thereby becoming
a car of vintage T + 1—and the other car is one year older. The other events have similar
explanations.
Integrating over households’ preferences yields the stationary distribution Q (a′, b′) over
holdings of cars of vintages a′ and b′:
Q (a′, b′) =
Z 1
0
Z ∞
0
h (a′, b′|θ, α) dF (θ) dG (α) .
(3)
Market equilibrium is deﬁned by standard competitive conditions. Speciﬁcally, an equi-
librium is a vector of households’ policies a∗(θ, α, a, b) and b∗(θ, α, a, b) and a vector of prices
p = (p0, .., pT−1) such that: (i) decision rules are optimal, and (ii) for every vintage t, house-
holds’ car holdings PT
b=0 Q (t, b) + PT
a=0 Q (a, t) equal the stock x (1 −γ)t of this vintage.
4
Calibration
4.1
Data
We use data from the 2000 Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), a cross-sectional survey of
7,860 U.S. households. The CEX reports detailed information about households’ vehicles at
the time of the interview, such as the model; the age; whether it is owned or leased; whether
it was acquired in the last 12 months; whether it was acquired new or used; and the price
paid.15 The CEX also reports households’ income and consumption for diﬀerent categories of
goods. We aggregate consumption goods to construct households’ non-durable consumption
following Krueger and Perri (2006), and we will use it to capture households’ willingness to
pay for car quality in our quantitative analysis.
Table 1 reports some aggregate statistics on households’ car holdings, computed from the
CEX. The quantitative analysis of our model will aim to match these moments. Speciﬁcally,
the ﬁrst row reports that, on average, one in every three U.S. households acquired a car
in the 12 months prior to the survey interview. The second row reports that one in every
4.5 cars was purchased within the last 12 months. The third row reports that, of all cars
traded, approximately one in every four cars was new. Overall, these patterns indicate that
15The CEX also reports some information on cars provided by the employers (company cars), but this
information is less detailed than information about personal cars. In addition, in some cases, the decision to
replace a company car may not be in the hands of the household. For these reasons, we exclude company cars
from our analysis, but it is possible that some households use their cars for business purposes.
9


===== [PAGE 12] =====

Table 1: Secondary Market for Cars, U.S.
Households with at least one car
Households that acquired a car in the last 12 months
3.09
Total stock of cars
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
4.54
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
New Cars acquired in the last 12 months
3.55
Correlation(log(Non-Durables), Age of Young Car)
−0.30
Households with no car
0.13
Households with one car
0.34
Households with more than one car
0.53
Notes: This table provides aggregate statistics of the U.S. car market computed from the 2000
Consumer Expenditure Survey.
secondary car markets are very active. The fourth row reports that, on aggregate, households’
non-durable consumption predicts households’ car holdings, but heterogeneity in households’
preferences plays an important role in determining their car holdings. The last three rows
report the fraction of households with zero, one and more than one car, respectively. The
majority of U.S. households hold more than one car.16
4.2
Choice of Parameters
We calibrate the model to investigate whether it can quantitatively replicate the aggregate
statistics for the U.S. markets reported in Table 1. Most parameters are taken directly from
the data, while some are calibrated to match some important features of the CEX data. We
report in Table 2 the numerical values of the parameters that we use in our calibration, and we
describe below how we choose these numerical values, thereby providing intuitive arguments
on the “identiﬁcation” of these parameters.
We assume that one period equals one year, and we set the discount rate β = .95.
One important input into our quantitative analysis is the distribution F of the marginal
valuation for quality θ, which is not directly observable. The following theoretical argument is
one way to understand our choice of the empirical counterpart of θ. It is natural to think that
θ is (inversely) related to the marginal utility of the outside good (non-durable consumption
16More precisely, 33 percent of households hold two cars; 13.4 percent of households hold three cars; 4.4
percent of household hold four cars; 1.4 percent of households hold ﬁve cars; and 0.65 percent of households
hold six or more cars. Our model pools all these households into households with two cars.
10


===== [PAGE 13] =====

Table 2: Calibration Parameters
Parameter
Value
β
µy
σy
µǫ
σǫ
E (α)
St.Dev. (α)
0.95
9.49
0.63
0
1.16
0.2362
0.0748
Parameter
Value
X
x
γ
T
c
δ
q0
λa
1.40
0.0869
0.02
20
1, 350
0.0236
0.78
0.15 - 0.50
Notes: This table provides the numerical values of the parameters used in the calibration.
in our setting, see Tirole, 1988, chapter 2). If we assume that households have logarithmic
utilities, then this inverse marginal utility is equal to non durable consumption. We also allow
for an idiosyncratic component in the valuation for quality. Guided in part by this reasoning,
we let θ = yǫ, where y is household non-durable consumption and ǫ is a parameter that is a
household-speciﬁc preference component uncorrelated with y.17 Using the CEX, we ﬁnd that
a lognormal distribution with parameters µy = 9.49 and σy = 0.63 ﬁts the distribution of
non-durable consumption almost perfectly. We further let ǫ have a lognormal distribution,
imposing µǫ = 0 (this is just a normalization) and calibrating the parameter σǫ. The parameter
σǫ aﬀects several statistics in the calibration, but the correlation between the log of households’
non-durable consumption and the age of their youngest car is particularly informative about
this parameter σǫ. The calibrated value is σǫ = 1.16.
We let the distribution G of α be a Beta distribution. We calibrate the two parameters
of the Beta distribution to match the aggregate statistics reported in Table 1. We obtain
the best ﬁt of the data with a mean α equal to 0.2362 and a standard deviation of α equal
to 0.0748. The key statistic that pins down the mean value of α is the number of cars per
household, whereas the standard deviation of α has a broader eﬀect on all statistics.
We set the total stock of cars X = 1.40 to match the sum of the fraction of households with
one car plus twice the fraction of households with more than one car. We obtain the empirical
analog of the ratio of the stock to the ﬂow X
x in the model from the product of the ratios
Total stock of cars
Cars acquired last 12 months and
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
New Cars acquired in the last 12 months
reported in Table 1. This operation yields
X
x = 16.11, thus implying that the value of x
equals 0.0869. We set the “exogenous scrappage” γ = 0.02 by calculating in the CEX the
average fraction of vintage-a to vintage-(a + 1) cars for all cars less than 15 years old.18
17Most previous empirical papers (see Section 2) on the auto market show that several observable house-
holds’ characteristics (income, household size, age etc.) aﬀect car choices. In the Online Appendix, we show
how our framework allows us to capture households’ heterogeneity in a similar way to those related papers.
18The exogenous scrappage rate γ = 0.02 is lower than in Cohen and Greenspan (1999) for the years 1970-
11


===== [PAGE 14] =====

Furthermore, from the equality of the total stock of cars X = x1−(1−γ)T +1
γ
, we obtain an
endogenous scrappage age T = 20.19
We set c = $1, 350 by computing the per-car annual average expenditure on car main-
tenance, insurance and gasoline in the CEX.20 We then set qT to match the scrappage age
T = 20 corresponding to this value of c, given that the marginal consumer of this car must
receive zero ﬂow utility. We further let qa = (1 −δ)a q0, with a value of δ = 0.0236 to match
the average annual depreciation of car prices of around 20 percent. We then choose q0 = 0.78
to match the average price of $22,000 of a new-car purchase reported in the CEX.
To calculate transaction costs λa, we use price data obtained from the Kelley Blue Book
for some of the most popular cars in the U.S.: Toyota Corolla, Toyota Camry, and Toyota
Previa/Sienna. As in Porter and Sattler (1999), we estimate transaction costs using the diﬀer-
ence between suggested retail and trade-in values. These values increase from approximately
15 percent for one-year-old cars to more than 50 percent for cars more than ten years old.21
We then ﬁt a quadratic polynomial regression in age to these data on transaction costs to
smooth them and average them across diﬀerent cars.22
4.3
Computational Algorithm
For each value of the parameters, we take N = 1, 500 draws θi and αi i = 1, ..., N from their
distributions F and G, and we compute the equilibrium using the following steps:
1. We start with a vector of prices p = (p0, .., pT−1) .
2. For each household (θ, α) , we calculate optimal policies a′ (θ, α, a, b) and b′ (θ, α, a, b).
3. We calculate the stationary distribution h (a, b|θ, α).
1996. This is consistent with the persistent improvement in car durability and reliability over time that Cohen
and Greenspan already observed in their sample period.
19The scrappage rate of cars older than 15 years increases substantially in the CEX. We view our choices
of scrappage rates for cars of age a < T
and of age T as reasonable approximations of a scrappage process
that increases more gradually over the age of the car.
20This number is stable across vintages, so we use a constant number to simplify computations.
21Transaction costs are increasing in the age of the car in percentage terms. However, because car prices
are declining in the age of the car, the dollar value of transaction costs is non-monotonic in the age of the car,
declining for cars older than three years.
22Our estimates of transaction costs do not take into account that transaction costs may be heterogeneous
across households. Speciﬁcally, for individuals who choose to transact with dealers, the bid-ask spread is a
lower bound on their transaction costs. Instead, for households that choose to transact with private parties, the
bid-ask spread is likely an upper bound on their transaction costs. Unfortunately, allowing for heterogeneous
transaction costs is computationally burdensome.
12


===== [PAGE 15] =====

Table 3: Secondary Markets: Model vs. Data
Data
Model
Households with at least one car
Households that acquired a car in the last 12 months
3.09
3.21
Total stock of cars
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
4.54
5.08
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
New Cars acquired in the last 12 months
3.55
3.27
Correlation(log(Non-Durables), Age of Young Car)
−0.30
−0.23
Households with no car
0.13
0.13
Households with one car
0.34
0.35
Households with more than one car
0.53
0.52
Notes: This table reports the moments of the data that the model seeks to match and the corresponding
moments computed from the model with the parameters reported in Table 1.
4. We calculate the stationary distribution Q (a, b) of age a as PN
i=1 h (a, b|θi, αi) .
5. We search for the vector of prices p that minimizes the excess demand of all vintages.
More formally, we search for the vector of prices p that minimizes the largest absolute
value of excess demand across all vintages:23
min
p
max
t∈{0,...,T}
(
T
X
b=0
Q (t, b) +
T
X
a=0
Q (a, t) −x (1 −γ)t

)
.
We choose the parameters that minimize the maximum absolute value of the percentage
diﬀerences between the empirical and the theoretical moments reported in Table 1 (of course,
the last line is redundant, so the objective function does not include it).
4.4
Results
Table 3 reports the numerical results of the calibration of our model, along with the observed
values in the data. (In the analysis in the following sections, we refer to the results of Table 3 as
the “baseline case.”) The model is a quantitative success, as it matches the aggregate features
of the U.S. car market well. This suggests that, for the purposes of understanding aggregate
features of the allocative role of secondary markets, our simple model of vertical diﬀerentiation
with transaction costs captures key aspects of the gains from trade in the used-car market.
We now discuss in more detail some key outcomes of the calibrated model.
23We stop searching for prices when this absolute value is less than
1
N .
13


===== [PAGE 16] =====

Trade.
The model closely matches the statistics on aggregate trade in cars and activity
in secondary markets, most notably the fraction of households acquiring a car and the fraction
of cars traded, although it slightly underpredicts them (by less than ten percent, at most).
Household Car Holdings.
Table 3 shows that the model matches the fraction of house-
holds with no car, one car, and more than one car very well. The parameter that allows the
model to match these statistics is α, the ratio between the preference for the second and for the
ﬁrst car. Moreover, the model matches the correlation between households’ non-durable con-
sumption and the of age of their youngest car reasonably well. The unobserved heterogeneity
parameter ǫ governs this correlation.
Car Prices.
The fast decline of equilibrium prices—approximately 20 percent per year—
is the joint outcome of cars’ physical depreciation (captured by the parameters γ, δ and T) and
the equilibrium sorting of consumers across vintages. The reason for this large price decline
is that the U.S. distribution of preferences displays wide dispersion, and, thus, the willingness
to pay for a marginally better car is high. In Section 6, we will see that in France, where the
dispersion of the distribution of preferences is lower, the price decline is not as steep.
5
Counterfactual Analyses
We now perform several counterfactuals. Speciﬁcally, we analyze the eﬀects of transaction
costs by considering two extreme cases: frictionless secondary markets and complete shutdown
of secondary markets.
By changing the frictions in the secondary market relative to our
calibrated baseline, these counterfactuals can help us gain some quantitative insights into the
allocative and welfare eﬀects of secondary markets. We then consider the case of scrappage
policies that eliminate the availability of older cars.
Naturally, we expect any changes in secondary markets to aﬀect primary markets. Thus,
the supply response of new-goods producers is an important element determining the welfare
consequences of secondary markets’ frictions. We consider two alternative scenarios that help
highlight how primary markets adjust. First, we consider the case of perfectly elastic supply—
i.e., the price of new cars does not respond to changes in transaction costs, but the quantity
does. Second, we consider the case of perfectly inelastic supply—i.e., the quantity of new
cars does not respond to changes in transaction costs, but the price does. These two cases
can be interpreted as two extremes—a perfectly competitive industry with constant marginal
costs of production versus an industry with binding capacity constraints for all producers. We
14


===== [PAGE 17] =====

wish to emphasize that our counterfactuals do not include some additional long-run eﬀects,
such as the change in the durability of cars; see the Conclusions for additional discussions.
Nonetheless, we believe that these counterfactuals are useful for understanding the importance
of transaction costs for manufacturers since they indicate that either output or prices change
when transaction costs change, even in a oligopolistic market for new cars.
In our analysis, we compare consumer surplus across the diﬀerent counterfactuals by av-
eraging the value functions Vθ,α (a, b) over the stationary distribution h (a, b|θ, α):
T+1
X
a=0
T+1
X
b=0
Z 1
0
Z ∞
0
Vθ,α (a, b) h (a, b|θ, α) dF (θ) dG (α) .
Moreover, we calculate producers’ per-capita ﬂow proﬁts as (p0 −mc) x. In the case of a
perfectly elastic supply, proﬁts are zero. In the case of an inelastic supply, we impute the
marginal cost mc to be equal to the baseline new-car price p0. Hence, producers’ proﬁts are
zero in the baseline case, whereas they are equal to (p′
0 −p0) x in counterfactual scenarios,
where p′
0 is the counterfactual new-car price.
The diﬀerences in allocations and welfare between our counterfactuals and the baseline
case are largely due to three economic eﬀects that we will discuss in more detail for each case.
1. Increasing (decreasing) transaction costs has the partial-equilibrium direct eﬀect of de-
stroying (freeing) resources, thereby aﬀecting households’ willingness to pay because
they obtain diﬀerent net resale prices.
2. Lower (higher) transaction costs have the partial-equilibrium indirect eﬀect of allowing
a ﬁner (coarser) matching between households’ preferences and the quality of their cars.
3. Eﬀects (1) and (2) feed into the general-equilibrium eﬀects of changing new- and used-car
prices and/or quantities relative to the baseline case.
5.1
The Eﬀects of Transaction Costs
In this section, we consider the allocative and welfare eﬀects of transaction costs. This is
the natural starting point to study the importance of secondary markets. In our quantitative
analysis in Section 4, we used transaction costs proportional to prices, calculated by ﬁtting
dealer bid-ask spreads. We now consider two extreme counterfactual scenarios: frictionless
secondary markets and complete shutdown of secondary markets. These cases correspond to
λa = 0 and λa = 1 for all a, respectively.
15


===== [PAGE 18] =====

5.1.1
Frictionless Resale Markets
When transaction costs are zero—i.e., λa = 0 for all a—the households’ maximization problem
is equivalent to a static one. Households hold the same car vintage/quality over time by trading
in their depreciated units every period. Of course, households diﬀer in the vintage they hold.
The equilibrium displays perfect matching between households’ preferences (either θ or αθ)
and the qualities of the cars chosen in every period. Market clearing requires that either:
1. All households have at least one car, and the highest-valuation households own two
cars. In this case, there is a threshold value (αθ)′ that satisﬁes X = 1+1−M
 (αθ)′
=
2 −M
 (αθ)′
, where households’ preferences αθ have c.d.f. M (z) =
R z
0 m (x) dx and
p.d.f. m (x) =
R +∞
0
g
 x
θ

f (θ) 1
θdθ. Hence, all households own one car (the term 1), and
all households with valuation above (αθ)′ own two cars (the term 1 −M
 (αθ)′
); or
2. there are households with zero, one, and two cars. In this case, there are thresholds θ′′
and (αθ)′′′ that satisfy X = 1 −F (θ′′) + 1 −M
 (αθ)′′′
and θ′′ = (αθ)′′′. Hence, all
households with valuation above θ′′ own one car (the term 1 −F (θ′′)), all households
with valuation above (αθ)′′′ own two cars (the term 1 −M
 (αθ)′′′
), and the lowest
willingness-to-pay of one- and two-car households is the same.
Case 2 is the empirically relevant one, as 13 percent of households have no cars.
Table 4 reports the quantitative results for the scenario of zero transaction costs for the
case of a perfectly elastic supply of new cars—i.e., the price p0 of new cars is the same as in
our baseline case in Section 4—and for the case of a perfectly inelastic supply of new cars—
i.e., the quantity x of new cars is the same as in the baseline case in Section 4. Overall, the
quantitative eﬀects are similar in these two supply scenarios.
Quantity of cars.
Table 4 reports that new-car output increases in the case of elastic
supply relative to the baseline case. The reason is that the reduction in transaction costs
and the ﬁner matching of qualities to households’ valuations combine to raise high-valuation
households’ willingness to pay. Since prices are kept at the same level by the adjustment
of (perfectly elastic) supply, the number of new cars demanded increases. In contrast, by
deﬁnition, new-car output is unchanged in the case of inelastic supply.
When new-car supply is elastic, the scrappage age decreases slightly relative to the baseline
case. The reason is as follows. If the scrappage age did not decrease, the increase in the supply
of new cars would lead to an increase in the total stock of cars. Hence, the marginal owner
of a car would have a lower valuation (either θ or αθ) than in the baseline case. However,
16


===== [PAGE 19] =====

Table 4: Allocative and Welfare Eﬀects of Secondary Markets, No Transaction Costs
Baseline Elastic
Supply
Inelastic
Supply
New Cars
New Cars, Baseline Case
1
1.05
1
Price of a New Car
Price of a New Car, Baseline Case
1
1
1.074
Households with at least one car
Households that acquired a car in the last 12 months
3.21
1
1
Total stock of cars
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
5.08
1
1
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
New Cars acquired in the last 12 months
3.27
16.64
16.64
Correlation(log(Non-Durables), Age of Young Car)
−0.23
−0.25
−0.23
Households with no cars
0.13
0.13
0.13
Households with one car
0.35
0.35
0.35
Households with two cars
0.52
0.52
0.52
Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case
1
1.016
1.008
Mean

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

1
1.024
1.008
Median

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

1
1.026
1.010
Welfare
Welfare, Baseline case
1
1.016
1.015
Transaction Costs
Consumer Surplus
0.008
0
0
Notes:
This table reports statistics on allocations and welfare computed from the model with no
transaction costs (i.e., λa
=
0) and with an elastic or inelastic supply of new cars, respectively.
Mean

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

and Median

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

are
computed using only households with cars in the baseline case.
17


===== [PAGE 20] =====

taking into account that the holding cost c is such that the marginal owner for the baseline
case has zero utility, the reduction in marginal valuation implies that the marginal owner’s
net utility ﬂow in the new scenario has to be negative, which is a contradiction. The reduction
in scrappage age implies that some low-valuation consumers scrap their cars at the earlier age
of T = 19 rather than at T = 20.
In contrast, when new-car supply is inelastic, the endogenous scrappage age is the same as
in the baseline case—i.e., T = 20. The reason is that the total stock of cars does not change,
and, therefore, the optimal scrapping age does not change either since net prices (i.e., net of
transaction costs) are positive in both cases. Overall, the total stock of cars is the same in
both supply scenarios as in the baseline case.
Prices.
New-car prices are obviously unchanged when the supply of new cars is elastic,
whereas they increase when the supply of new cars is inelastic. This increase is the mirror
image of the increase in output discussed above for the case of elastic supply. First, the absence
of transaction costs allows higher-valuation households to capture the full resale value of cars,
thereby increasing their willingness to pay. Second, the absence of transaction costs allows
a ﬁner matching between household preferences and cars.
In particular, higher-valuation
households own better cars, thereby increasing their willingness to pay.
Interestingly, in both new-car supply scenarios, prices of older cars (i.e., older than the
average car) decline relative to the baseline case—on average, by approximately 13 percent
when supply is elastic and by approximately two percent when supply is inelastic. The intuition
for the decrease is consistent with the new-car price increase and arises from the balancing of
two contrasting eﬀects. First, as cars age, the expected number of future trades is smaller.
Hence, while the elimination of transaction costs raises households’ willingness to pay, this
eﬀect is smaller for older goods than for newer goods. Second, the ﬁner matching allowed by
frictionless trade implies that, relative to the baseline case, lower-valuation households own
older cars. Overall, the second negative eﬀect dominates the ﬁrst positive (but small) one for
older goods, thereby depressing their prices. When the supply of cars is elastic, there is an
additional eﬀect coming from the higher new-car output. Since only some of the oldest cars
are scrapped when transaction costs are zero, the stock of cars of all vintages a < T is higher,
too. Thus, since the equilibrium displays perfect matching between households’ preferences
and the quality of their cars, the valuation (either θ or αθ) of the owner of each vintage a < T
has to drop to equate supply and demand.
18


===== [PAGE 21] =====

Trade.
The eﬀect of removing transaction costs on the volume of trade is dramatic, but
perhaps unsurprising. When transaction costs are zero, all cars trade in every period, so the
volume of trade is equal to 100 percent. This explains the third and fourth rows of Table 4.
While cars are endogenously scrapped at T = 20, the exogenous scrappage γ implies that the
ratio of the stock of cars to the ﬂow of new cars equals 16.64, lower than T. This explains the
ﬁfth row of Table 4.
Household Car Holdings.
The distribution of the number of cars per household is
exactly the same in the counterfactual scenarios as in the baseline case. This holds in our
model as long as there is trade in the oldest vintage. To understand the reason for this feature,
note that the price of the oldest vintage must be zero because the identity of the last vintage
is determined by the lowest-valuation used-car owner’s indiﬀerence between owning a car of
that vintage or scrapping it—thus not owning any car and enjoying a utility ﬂow of zero.
Hence, the scrappage age is determined by the equality of the utility ﬂow for the last vintage
(either θ′′qT or αθ′′′qT) and the holding cost c of the lowest-valuation used-car owner (either θ′′
or αθ′′′). Since the utility ﬂow is higher with younger vintages, the previous arguments imply
that to ﬁgure out whether a household with valuation θ owns a car, it is enough to determine
if its utility ﬂow for the last vintage (either θqT or αθqT) exceeds the holding cost c. Since
the total stock of cars is the same in the counterfactual scenarios as in the baseline scenarios,
it must also be the case that the marginal θ (and αθ) that owns a unit is the same, implying
that the distribution of cars per household is also the same.
Removing transaction costs increases the absolute value of the correlation between (the log
of) households’ non-durable consumption and the age of their youngest car, as displayed in
the sixth row of Table 4. The magnitude of this increase is small, suggesting that transaction
costs have little eﬀect on the sorting between cars and households in the baseline case.
Welfare.
The three economic eﬀects of removing transaction costs discussed above—i.e.,
the direct eﬀect of freeing resources, the indirect eﬀect of allowing a ﬁner matching between
preferences and vintages, and the general-equilibrium eﬀect on prices—have a contrasting
impact on consumer surplus and on overall welfare relative to the baseline case. Speciﬁcally,
when there are no transaction costs, the ﬁrst two eﬀects increase consumer surplus and welfare
relative to the baseline case.
However, the general-equilibrium eﬀect on prices—lower on
old cars and higher on new cars when the supply is inelastic—has a heterogeneous impact
on individual households’ surplus, depending on their preferences, and a negative impact on
aggregate consumer surplus; but the general-equilibrium eﬀect a positive impact on producers’
19


===== [PAGE 22] =====

Consumer Surplus, as a fraction of baseline
Percentile of Valuation θ
13
50
100
0.95
1
1.05
Fig. 1: The ﬁgure displays counterfactual consumer surplus with no transaction costs relative to
baseline consumer surplus by percentile of valuation θ, elastic new-car supply (dashed line) and
inelastic new-car supply (solid line). Consumer surplus is calculated as the average value function
before purchasing any car:
R 1
0 Vθ,α (T + 1, T + 1) dG (α).
proﬁts when supply is inelastic.
Figure 1 displays the ratio between consumer surplus in the counterfactual case of zero
transaction costs and in the baseline case for all households that acquire a car, ranked by the
percentile of their preference θ, for the two scenarios of elastic and inelastic supply. Overall,
Figure 1 shows that, for almost all households, surplus is higher when transaction costs are
zero, indicating that the ﬁrst two eﬀects dominate. Interestingly, the ratios are non-monotonic
in θ. Households at the bottom of the distribution are marginal car consumers—i.e., they
own the worst cars. Prices of these cars adjust to any change in transaction costs to leave
surplus close to zero. Inframarginal households receive a positive surplus gain because price
adjustment cannot fully extract the surplus change. However, while these gains are monotonic
in the preference θ, they have a vanishing percentage eﬀect on the welfare of the highest-
preference households. Overall, the average and median percentage surplus gains from having
frictionless resale markets equal 0.8 to 2.4 and one to 2.6 percent of the baseline surplus,
respectively, depending on the elasticity of the new-car supply.
Table 4 reports that, when secondary markets are frictionless, total consumer surplus
increases by 1.5 percent or 0.8 percent relative to the baseline case, depending on the elasticity
of new-car supply. These correspond to $383 or $217 per year for households with at least
one car. Table 4 further reports that the increase in aggregate consumer surplus is smaller
20


===== [PAGE 23] =====

than the increase for most households (as displayed in Figure 1); this is because the highest-
valuation households have disproportionate weights in the calculation of aggregate consumer
surplus due to the large preference inequality in the U.S., and these households receive the
smallest gains.
When supply is elastic, producers’ proﬁts are zero, and, thus, overall welfare increases
by the same amount as consumer surplus—i.e., by 1.5 percent. When supply is inelastic,
producers’ proﬁts increase relative to the baseline case since new-car prices are higher. Overall,
removing transaction costs increases welfare by 1.47 percent in the case of inelastic new-car
supply, as well. More than half of this increase is due to the increase in consumer surplus.
The magnitudes reported in Table 4 allow us to quantify the three economic eﬀects of
removing transaction costs. The last row of Table 4 reports that the direct eﬀect of transaction
costs equals 0.8 percent of consumer surplus in the baseline case. Since the total eﬀect of
removing transaction costs on consumer surplus when new-car supply is elastic equals 1.5
percent of consumer surplus, the indirect eﬀect—through a ﬁner matching between preferences
and vintages—is of the same order of magnitude as the direct eﬀect of transaction costs.
Instead, the diﬀerence between aggregate welfare and consumer surplus when new-car supply
is inelastic suggests that the general-equilibrium eﬀect on new-car prices—or, alternatively,
supply distortions—is quite small in this case.
5.1.2
No Resale Markets
When transaction costs are prohibitive (i.e., λa = 1 for all a), households purchase only new
cars, and their key choice is how long to keep them before scrapping and replacing them. In
equilibrium, each household has an optimal scrappage age T (θ) , with households with higher
valuation θ scrapping their cars earlier, thereby holding, on average, younger vintages.
Table 5 reports the quantitative results with counterfactual prohibitive transaction costs
for the case of a perfectly elastic supply of new cars—i.e., the price p0 of new cars is the same
as in our baseline case in Section 4—and for the case of a perfectly inelastic supply of new
cars—i.e., the quantity x of new cars is the same as in the baseline case in Section 4. Overall,
as in the previous analysis of no transaction costs, the overall aggregate welfare eﬀects are
mostly similar in the two supply scenarios.
Quantity of cars.
Table 5 reports that, when new-car supply is elastic, new-car output
increases by 23 percent relative to the baseline case. Note that this implies that output is
non-monotonic in transaction costs since Table 4 shows that new-car output is also larger
when there are no transaction costs relative to the baseline case. However, diﬀerent forces
21


===== [PAGE 24] =====

Table 5: Allocative and Welfare Eﬀects of Secondary Markets, Prohibitive Transaction Costs
Baseline Elastic
Supply
Inelastic
Supply
New Cars
New Cars, Baseline Case
1
1.23
1
Price of a New Car
Price of a New Car, Baseline Case
1
1
1.41
Households with at least one car
Households that acquired a car in the last 12 months
3.21
7.05
7.95
Total stock of cars
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
5.08
11.36
12.58
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
New Cars acquired in the last 12 months
3.27
1
1
Correlation(log(Non-Durables), Age of Young Car)
−0.23
−0.14
−0.15
Households with no cars
0.13
0.27
0.32
Households with one car
0.35
0.28
0.28
Households with two cars
0.52
0.45
0.40
Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case
1
0.98
0.94
Mean

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

1
0.71
0.61
Median

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

1
0.91
0.79
Welfare
Welfare, Baseline case
1
0.98
0.97
Transaction Costs
Consumer Surplus
0.008
N.A.
N.A.
Notes:
This table reports statistics on allocations and welfare computed from the model with pro-
hibitive transaction costs (i.e., λa = 1) and with an elastic or inelastic supply of new cars, respectively.
Mean

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

and Median

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

are
computed using only households with cars in the baseline case.
22


===== [PAGE 25] =====

aﬀect output in the two extreme counterfactual scenarios. The reason for the large increase
when transaction costs are prohibitive is that scrappage increases substantially. This occurs
because the secondary-market shutdown implies that the only way for households to upgrade
their quality is to scrap their current cars. From the numbers reported in Table 5, it can be
veriﬁed that, on average, scrappage occurs at approximately T = 14 in the case of inelastic
supply and at approximately T = 13 in the case of elastic supply, as compared to T = 20 in
the baseline case. Thus, the comparison between the elastic and inelastic cases indicates that,
on average, households scrap cars slightly earlier in the case of elastic supply. The reason
is that, with inelastic supply, new-car output does not increase to partially compensate for
earlier scrappage, leading to a higher new-car price and dampening the incentive to scrap
early. Overall, the total stock of cars decreases substantially relative to the baseline case—in
particular, in the case of inelastic supply.
Prices.
Table 5 reports that, when new-car supply is inelastic, new-car prices increase
by 41 percent relative to the baseline case. This is a mirror image of the increase in output in
the case of a perfectly elastic supply: prices of new cars increase relative to the baseline case
because the demand for new cars increases. Since households scrap their cars earlier than in
the baseline case, the demand for new cars increases, and so does their price.
Trade.
The eﬀect of prohibitive transaction costs on the volume of trade is, again, un-
surprising. When transaction costs are prohibitive, the volume of trade in used cars is zero.
This, along with the change in the stock of cars, explains the fourth and ﬁfth rows.
Household Car Holdings.
Overall, the inability to resell cars reduces the stock of cars
relative to the baseline case. Thus, the fraction of households with no cars increases, and
the fraction of households with two cars decreases relative to the baseline case. However,
a natural question arises: Since transaction costs are prohibitive, why do some households
choose to have only one car—i.e., why do they scrap a car rather than keeping it as a second
car? Clearly, at scrappage time, the car satisﬁes θq −c ≥0, and for most households this
inequality holds strictly. However, households keep their ﬁrst cars until they are quite old;
therefore, these cars are, on average, of low quality, implying that a typical case involves
αθq −c < 0. Therefore, it is better to scrap relatively old cars than to keep them as second
cars, even though they would give positive utility ﬂows if held as ﬁrst cars.
Moreover, prohibitive transaction costs decrease the absolute value of the correlation be-
tween (the log of) households’ non-durable consumption and the age of their youngest car, as
reported in the sixth row of Table 5. The magnitude of this decrease is sizable, suggesting that
23


===== [PAGE 26] =====

Consumer Surplus, as a fraction of baseline
Percentile of Valuation θ
13
50
100
0
0.5
1
Fig. 2:
The ﬁgure displays counterfactual consumer surplus with prohibitive transaction costs
relative to baseline consumer surplus by percentile of valuation θ, elastic new-car supply (dashed
line) and inelastic new-car supply (solid line). Consumer surplus is calculated as the average value
function before purchasing any car:
R 1
0 Vθ,α (T + 1, T + 1) dG (α).
the inability to resell cars has a non-trivial eﬀect on the sorting between cars and households
and, thus, on their surplus.
Welfare.
Figure 2 displays the ratio between consumer surplus with prohibitive trans-
action costs and consumer surplus in the baseline case for all households that acquire a car
in the baseline case, ranked by the percentile of their valuation θ, for the two scenarios of
elastic and inelastic supply. The ﬁgure conﬁrms that surplus is higher for all households when
new-car supply is more elastic. The ﬁgure also shows that households at the bottom of the
valuation distribution suﬀer the largest surplus loss relative to the baseline case because the
lower stock of cars implies that these households do not own a car. Indeed, the surplus losses
are quite dramatic for households with valuation below the median of the distribution: The
average and the median percentage losses equal 29-39 percent and 9-21 percent of the base-
line surplus, respectively, depending on the elasticity of the new-car supply. Overall, Table 5
reports that, relative to the baseline case, aggregate consumer surplus drops by two percent
when supply is elastic and by six percent when supply is inelastic, corresponding to $505 or
$1,513 per year, respectively, for households with cars in the baseline case. Table 5 reports
that the drop in aggregate consumer surplus is smaller than the drop for most households
because the highest-preference households have disproportionate weights in the calculation of
24


===== [PAGE 27] =====

aggregate surplus. Figure 2 shows that these households have the smallest surplus loss.
When new-car supply is inelastic, producers’ proﬁts increase substantially since new-car
prices increase by 41 percent, as indicated in the ﬁrst row of Table 5. Overall, the decrease of
consumer welfare due to higher new-car prices is approximately equivalent to the increase in
producer proﬁts. Thus, the magnitude of the aggregate decrease in welfare due to prohibitive
transaction costs relative to the baseline case is similar—two or three percent—in the two
supply scenarios.
Multiple qualities.
One limitation of the previous analysis is that we have not allowed a
plausible supply-side response: if used cars are not available, manufacturers have an incentive
to provide lower-quality new cars.
We can extend the model to allow for this possibility
by assuming that there is a competitive (i.e., inﬁnitely elastic) supply of lower-quality cars.
Speciﬁcally, in the Appendix we report in detail on the case in which manufacturers supply
new cars of two qualities: a car of quality q0 (i.e., the same car supplied in the benchmark
case) and a car of quality equal to q5 (i.e., a car whose quality equals a ﬁve-year old car of the
benchmark case). We set the price of the car of quality q5 to its price in the benchmark case:
$7, 465. Thus, the price is well below that of any new car in the U.S. market.
This counterfactual delivers four main results. First, the output of the high-quality new
good falls as households with intermediate preferences substitute towards the cheaper, low-
quality good.
However, total new car output rises signiﬁcantly relative to the case of a
single new car. Second, the aggregate welfare loss from prohibitive transaction costs are even
smaller than in the case with a single new car, since households have an additional margin
of adjustment. Third, the distribution of the welfare losses are qualitatively similar to those
displayed in Figure 2 for the case of a single quality of new cars: consumers at the bottom of
the distribution suﬀer the most, because low-quality new goods are still too expensive for these
consumers relative to very old used goods. Fourth, households in the middle of the preference
distribution now suﬀer smaller losses, because the low-quality new goods allow them to obtain
qualities that are closer to their target qualities of the benchmark case.
Overall, this counterfactual suggests that a richer expansion of the set of new goods implies
a reduction of the aggregate welfare losses relative to the case of a single new car, especially
for middle-preference households.
5.2
Scrappage Policies
In this section, we investigate how scrappage policies aﬀect equilibrium allocations and welfare.
This analysis can be useful in understanding the eﬀects of policies that have been implemented
25


===== [PAGE 28] =====

in some countries. For example, Japan has a thorough inspection registration system (called
Shaken), with strict emission standards that induce households to scrap their cars earlier than
households in other countries do (Clerides, 2008).
We consider the following policy: All cars are scrapped when they reach the (approximate)
scrappage age that keeps the total stock of cars equal to the stock in the counterfactual with
prohibitive transaction costs examined in Section 5.1.2—i.e., T = 15 in the case of inelastic
supply and T = 13 in the case of elastic supply. However, two substantive diﬀerences arise
between these two counterfactuals. First, the level of transaction costs is diﬀerent. Speciﬁcally,
we consider the eﬀects of the scrappage policy with the same level of transaction costs as in the
baseline case (i.e., 15 percent of p1, increasing to approximately 50 percent of p10; see Section
4.2).
Therefore, secondary markets are active in the case of a scrappage policy.
Second,
households’ scrappage decisions are heterogeneous when transaction costs are prohibitive,
with higher-valuation households scrapping their cars earlier than lower-valuation households.
However, this heterogeneity does not arise under the policy studied in this section since all
cars have positive net resale values, and, thus, no households scrap them before they reach T.
As in previous analyses, we evaluate steady-state allocations and welfare. Hence, our analysis
complements the evaluation of temporary scrappage subsidies that aﬀect the intertemporal
incentives to scrap cars, generating a one-oﬀchange in the cross-sectional distribution of car
vintages (Adda and Cooper, 2000; Copeland and Kahn, 2013; Miravete and Moral, 2011).
These papers study models that do not allow for active secondary markets.
Table 6 reports the eﬀects of these counterfactual scrappage policies on allocations and
welfare in the two scenarios of elastic and inelastic supply, respectively. Overall, as in previous
counterfactual analyses, the quantitative eﬀects are similar in these two supply scenarios.
Quantity of Cars.
Table 6 reports that, when the new-car supply is elastic, new-car
output increases by 22 percent relative to the baseline case. However, relative to the baseline
case, the total stock of cars decreases by 16 percent, as the new-car increase does not com-
pensate for the decrease in the scrappage age. When the new-car supply is inelastic, the total
stock of cars decreases by 23 percent relative to the baseline case.
Prices.
Figure 3 displays the eﬀect of the scrappage policy on car prices relative to the
prices in the baseline case. The dashed line refers to elastic supply and the solid line to inelastic
supply. Two contrasting eﬀects are at work. First, the scrappage policy reduces the total stock
of cars, thereby raising the valuation of marginal buyers of all vintages and, thus, increasing
prices. Second, the scrappage policy decreases cars’ “lifetime,” thereby decreasing the resale
26


===== [PAGE 29] =====

Table 6: Allocative and Welfare Eﬀects of Scrappage Policies
Baseline Elastic
Supply
Inelastic
Supply
New Cars
New Cars, Baseline Case
1
1.22
1
Price of a New Car
Price of a New Car, Baseline Case
1
1
1.47
Households with at least one car
Households that acquired a car in the last 12 months
3.21
4.01
4.90
Total stock of cars
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
5.08
6.23
7.51
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
New Cars acquired in the last 12 months
3.27
1.98
1.74
Correlation(Log(Non-Durables), Age of Young Car)
−0.23
−0.21
−0.21
Households with no cars
0.13
0.25
0.30
Households with one car
0.35
0.33
0.32
Households with two cars
0.52
0.42
0.38
Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case
1
0.99
0.95
Mean

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

1
0.76
0.63
Median

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

1
0.92
0.79
Welfare
Welfare, Baseline case
1
0.99
0.98
Notes: This table reports statistics on car allocations computed from the equilibrium of the model with
a policy that imposes scrappage of all cars older than 14 years of age in the case of inelastic supply and
13 years of age in the case of elastic supply.
Mean

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

and Me-
dian

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

are computed using only households with cars in the baseline
case.
27


===== [PAGE 30] =====

Price, as a fraction of baseline price
Years of Age
0
5
10
15
0
1
2
3
4
Fig. 3: The ﬁgure displays counterfactual car prices relative to baseline car prices when new-car
supply is elastic (dashed line) and inelastic (solid line).
value of cars—of older vintages, in particular—and, thus, their prices. Figure 3 shows that
the ﬁrst eﬀect quantitatively dominates. Interestingly, intermediate vintages experience the
highest increase in prices relative to the baseline case. Intuitively, these are the vintages that
have more substitutes since they are in the middle of the vertical distribution of qualities.
Thus, the scarcity of cars relative to the benchmark case increases the prices of these vintages
relatively more. Finally, prices of older vintages drop rapidly. This is again intuitive since the
scrappage policy reduces the useful lifespan of cars.
Trade.
In both supply scenarios, since cars last fewer years, primary markets become
more important, and the volume of trade in secondary markets relative to primary markets
is lower than in the baseline case. Overall, the number of transactions in used goods is now
slightly lower than the number of transactions in new goods in both supply scenarios.
Household Car Holdings.
Table 6 shows that the smaller stock of cars, due to the
shorter lifespan of cars, increases the fraction of people without cars relative to the baseline
case. All of this reduction in the stock of cars comes at the expense of the fraction of households
with two cars. The reason is that households’ willingness to pay for their second car αθ is,
on average, low since α is low. Since the scrappage policy eliminates older cars and increases
the prices of younger cars, second cars are too expensive relative to households’ willingness
to pay for them. Moreover, this eﬀect is even stronger when the new-car supply is inelastic
28


===== [PAGE 31] =====

Consumer Surplus, as a fraction of baseline
Percentile of Valuation θ
13
50
100
0
0.5
1
Fig. 4: The ﬁgure displays counterfactual consumer surplus with the scrappage policy relative to
baseline consumer surplus by percentile of valuation θ, elastic new-car supply (dashed line) and
inelastic new-car supply (solid line). Consumer surplus is calculated as the average value function
before purchasing any car:
R 1
0 Vθ,α (T + 1, T + 1) dG (α).
since, as Figure 3 showed, prices increase more in that case. Thus, the decrease in the fraction
of households with two cars is larger when the new-car supply is inelastic.
Furthermore, these scrappage policies decrease the absolute value of the correlation be-
tween the log of households’ non-durable consumption and the age of their youngest car, as
reported in the sixth row of Table 6. The magnitude of this decrease is smaller than that
reported in Table 5, suggesting that scrappage policies have a smaller eﬀect than prohibitive
transaction costs on the sorting between cars and households.
Welfare.
Figure 4 displays the ratio between consumer surplus with the scrappage policy
and consumer surplus in the baseline case for households that acquire a car in the baseline
case, ranked by the percentile of their valuation θ, for the two scenarios of elastic and inelastic
supply. The ﬁgure conﬁrms that households at the bottom of the valuation distribution suﬀer
the largest surplus decrease relative to the baseline case because the lower stock of cars implies
that these households do not own a car. The average and median percentage surplus losses
equal 24 to 37 percent and 8 to 21 percent of the baseline surplus, respectively, depending
on the elasticity of the new-car supply.
However, Table 6 reports that the magnitude of
the aggregate eﬀects on consumer surplus is substantially smaller: either one or ﬁve percent,
depending on the elasticity of the new-car supply, corresponding to $246 or $1,230 per year for
29


===== [PAGE 32] =====

households with cars in the baseline case. The reason for the small aggregate loss relative to the
large loss for many households displayed in Figure 4 is that the highest-valuation households
suﬀer the smallest losses, and they have the largest weight in the aggregate consumer surplus.
Table 6 further shows that these scrappage policies generate a redistribution of welfare
from consumers to producers when supply is inelastic, consistent with the ﬁnding in Table 5.
Consumer surplus is lower with this scrappage policy because transaction costs are inﬁnite
for the oldest vintages. In contrast, producers’ proﬁts increase since new-car prices increase.
The overall eﬀect of the policy is to decrease welfare, although, again, the quantitative eﬀect
is only between one and two percent, depending on the elasticity of the new-car supply.24
Two contrasting eﬀects help explain the diﬀerence in welfare between the scrappage poli-
cies, reported in Table 6, and the case of prohibitive transaction costs, reported in Table 5.
First, secondary markets are active in the case of the scrappage policy, but not when transac-
tions costs are prohibitive, thereby allowing households to sell their depreciated cars at positive
net prices. This eﬀect leads to higher welfare in the case of the scrappage policy relative to the
case of prohibitive transaction costs. Second, households can choose when to scrap their cars
when transaction costs are prohibitive, but not with the scrappage policy, thereby allowing
households to keep cars older than T. This eﬀect leads to higher welfare in the case of pro-
hibitive transaction costs relative to the case of the scrappage policy. Overall, a comparison
between Tables 5 and 6 indicates that the ﬁrst eﬀect quantitatively dominates. The reason is
that the ﬁrst eﬀect allows for a ﬁner matching of relatively young vintages to high-valuation
consumers, whereas the second eﬀect allows for ﬁner control of relatively low-quality cars for
low-valuation consumers. The ﬁrst eﬀect dominates because of supermodularity: More value
is created at the top than is lost at the bottom.
6
The Eﬀect of Heterogeneity: A Comparison with France
As we highlight throughout our analysis, gains from trade in secondary markets for many
durable goods arise from heterogeneous valuations for quality. In our quantitative analysis,
a key input into a household’s valuation for quality θ is non-durable consumption. In this
section, we calibrate our model using France’s distribution of non-durable consumption to
investigate the quantitative performance of the model on data from a diﬀerent country. This
analysis also allows us to examine how preference heterogeneity aﬀects the allocative role of
secondary markets and used-car prices.
24The positive eﬀect of the scrappage policy on proﬁts may not be a general feature of the model. Because
durability is exogenous, a reduction in durability, as in the scrappage policy, could hurt producers.
30


===== [PAGE 33] =====

Table 7: Non-Durable Consumption, U.S. vs. France
United States France
Mean(Non-Durable Consumption)
16111.05 15079.37
St. Dev.(Non-Durable Consumption)
11826.26
9916.07
Notes: Values are in U.S. dollars. French prices are converted into U.S. dollars using the average exchange
rate during the year 2000: 1 U.S. Dollar = 1.085 Euro.
To this end, we use the 2000-2001 Enquˆete Budget des Familles, a cross-sectional survey
of 10,305 French households that is similar to the U.S. Consumer Expenditure Survey. Most
notably, it reports households’ income and consumption for diﬀerent categories of goods. We
aggregate goods to construct households’ non-durable consumption following as closely as
possible the aggregation we performed on the U.S. CEX. Moreover, the Budget des Familles
reports the number of vehicles that each household uses at the time of the interview, and, for
up to two vehicles per household, it reports information about each vehicle, such as whether
it was acquired in the previous 12 months and whether it was acquired new or used.
Table 7 reports the mean and the standard deviation of non-durable consumption in the
United States and in France, showing that heterogeneity is lower in France than in the U.S.
The French distribution of non-durable consumption is very well approximated by a lognormal
distribution with parameters µF R = 9.42 and σF R = 0.64. Moreover, Table 8 reports some ag-
gregate statistics on French households’ car holdings calculated from the Budget des Familles.
The ﬁrst row reports that, on average, only one out of every 4.5 households acquired a car in
France within the last year (the ratio is equal to three in the U.S.; see Table 1). The second
row reports that one out of every six cars was traded during the year 2000 (one out of every
4.5 cars in the U.S.). The third row reports that, of all cars traded, approximately one in three
cars was new (one in four in the U.S.). Overall, these aggregate statistics show that secondary
markets for cars are substantially less active in France than in the U.S., indicating that our
model linking the dispersion of preferences with the volume of trade is qualitatively consistent
with these cross-market diﬀerences. The last three rows of Table 8 report the distribution
of cars per household, documenting another important diﬀerence with the U.S.: The average
number of cars per household is 19-percent higher in the U.S. than in France.
In keeping with the spirit of the quantitative exercise, we perform a “constrained” cali-
bration of the model for France. In particular, we use French-speciﬁc parameters governing
households’ preferences over cars, the total stock of cars, and cars’ holding costs, whereas
we keep the characteristics of cars—i.e., depreciation and exogenous scrappage—the same as
31


===== [PAGE 34] =====

Table 8: Secondary Markets: Model vs. Data, France
Data Model
Households with at least one car
Households that acquired a car in the last 12 months
4.39
3.79
Total stock of cars
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
5.82
5.21
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
New Cars acquired in the last 12 months
2.98
3.19
Correlation(log(Non-Durables), Age of Young Car) −0.27
−0.35
Households with no cars
0.17
0.15
Households with one car
0.48
0.53
Households with two cars
0.35
0.32
Notes: This table reports the moments of the data computed from the 2000-2001 Budget des Familles that
the model seeks to match and the corresponding moments computed from the model; see text for more details.
those that we used in the calibration for the U.S.. More precisely, we let the product distri-
bution of the valuation θ = yǫ be given by the lognormal distribution of French households’
non-durable consumption y (parametrized as described above) and by a lognormal distribu-
tion of the unobserved heterogeneity ǫ. This unobservable heterogeneity captures some of the
preference-based diﬀerences between the U.S. and France that we do not explicitly model. Of
course, there are potentially other diﬀerences between the U.S. and French car market. How-
ever, we believe that it is useful to investigate how far our fairly parsimonious model can go in
matching the data. As for the U.S. calibration, we impose µǫ = 0 and we calibrate the param-
eter σǫ by matching the correlation between the log of households’ non-durable consumption
and the age of their youngest car, yielding σǫ = 0.87. We further allow the distribution G of
α to be a Beta distribution with parameters speciﬁc to France. We choose these parameters
to match the French aggregate statistics of the ﬁrst column. The calibrated value of the mean
of α equals .16 and the standard deviation of α equals 0. This implies that the dispersion of
the preference parameters ǫ and α are lower in France than in the U.S.. Moreover, we allow
the holding costs c to be speciﬁc to France and the calibrated value of c is 1,884 dollars.25
25Since the distribution of q, the exogenous scrappage parameter γ and the scrappage age T are the same
in the U.S. and French calibration, we need the holding cost c to be country-speciﬁc to equate the total stock
of cars to the total demand of cars. The Budget des Familles reports that the annual average household
expenditure on maintenance, insurance and gasoline equals $1,708 per car. This is higher than in the U.S., as
we ﬁnd in the calibrations.
32


===== [PAGE 35] =====

Price
Years of Age
0
5
10
15
20
0
8000
16000
24000
Fig. 5: The ﬁgure displays car prices in the U.S. (dashed line) and in France (solid line). Prices are
in U.S. dollars. French prices are converted into U.S. dollars using the average exchange rate during
the year 2000: 1 U.S. Dollar = 1.085 Euro.
The second column of Table 8 reports the results of the calibration. Table 8 conﬁrms that
our model is a quantitative success despite the constraint on the calibration. More speciﬁcally,
it shows that the valuation distribution allows the model to match the volume of trade in
secondary markets in France fairly well, along with the correlation between households’ non-
durable consumption and the vintage of their youngest car. Moreover, allowing for a country-
speciﬁc distribution of α allows the model to match the distribution of car holdings well.26
The model also generates interesting general-equilibrium patterns on the relative decline of
car prices between the two countries; Figure 5 displays them. New-car prices are higher in the
U.S. than in France, as they are in the data: the calibration delivers a new-car price in France
approximately 10-percent lower than that in the U.S.27 However, the model-generated prices
decline at a faster rate in the U.S. than in France. Thus, old-car prices (i.e., cars older than 4
years) are higher in France than in the U.S. The intuition for these patterns is that France’s
less-dispersed preference distribution ﬂattens the depreciation of prices, as the willingness to
pay for a marginally better car is lower when the preference distribution is less dispersed.
26The match between the model and the data becomes almost perfect if we allow the quality distribution
q to be speciﬁc to France (i.e., with q0 = 0.69 and δ = 0.015).
27Thus, our model provides a potential explanation for cross-country diﬀerence in car prices, as reported
by Verboven (1996) and Goldberg and Verboven (2001, 2005).
33


===== [PAGE 36] =====

7
Conclusions
Secondary markets play a potentially important role in determining the set of durable goods
available to consumers and how diﬀerent households with heterogeneous preferences beneﬁt
from such goods.
We set up a model to understand the allocative and welfare eﬀects of
secondary markets. Our analysis highlights that durable goods oﬀer many diﬀerent margins
of adjustments to consumers: which vintage to buy, how long to keep it, whether to sell it or
scrap it. These many margins of adjustments imply that any change in secondary markets—
because of changes in transaction costs over time or because of policies that directly aﬀect
them, such as scrappage policies—has potentially large eﬀects on the volume of trade and
allocations, but smaller eﬀects on consumers’ surplus and welfare.
There are several possible interesting extensions of our analysis. First, it would be useful
to allow for endogenous durability. This would have very little eﬀect in the counterfactual of
eliminating transaction costs because the endogenous scrappage age is very similar to that in
the baseline case. However, the eﬀects could be substantial in the counterfactuals with pro-
hibitive transaction costs and with the scrappage policy because the scrappage age in these
counterfactuals is signiﬁcantly lower than that in the baseline case. This would give manu-
facturers an incentive to reduce their investments in durability so that cars would depreciate
faster. Calculating the welfare consequences of accounting for endogenous durability requires
a measure of the cost savings that come from such a reduction in durability. However, even
without such a measure, we can conclude that the change in durability will be beneﬁcial in
the case of perfectly elastic supply because the cost savings will be passed along to consumers;
this allows the industry to adjust by better tailoring the design of the goods to the needs
of consumers. Moreover, there will be a larger output response in these counterfactuals be-
cause the reduced durability will lower the cost of production. Second, it would be useful to
understand in more detail the eﬀects of variety of cars in the primary market. This would po-
tentially improve our understanding of the eﬀect of secondary markets on the primary market.
Finally, we believe that an extension of our framework may be useful in studying the eﬀects
of alternative emissions policies: if the emissions of new vehicles are decreasing over time,
durability aﬀects aggregate emissions. One could study the relative impact of a policy that
accelerates the technological improvement in emissions compared to a policy that encourages
scrappage of old, more highly polluting, vehicles.
34


===== [PAGE 37] =====

Table 9: Allocative and Welfare Eﬀects of Secondary Markets, Prohibitive Transaction Costs,
Elastic Supply of New Cars of Two Qualities
Two Qualities
of New Cars
New Cars of Quality q0
New Cars, Baseline Case
0.83
New Cars of Quality q5
Cars of Quality q5, Baseline Case
0.78
Total New Cars
New Cars, Baseline Case
1.53
HHs with at least one car
HHs that acquired a car in the last 12 months
6.24
Total stock of cars
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
10.11
Cars acquired in the last 12 months
New Cars acquired in the last 12 months
1
Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline
0.99
Mean

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline

0.86
Median

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline

0.98
Welfare
Welfare, Baseline case
0.99
Notes:
This
table
reports
statistics
on
allocations and
welfare
computed
from
the
model
with
prohibitive
transaction
costs
(i.e.,
λa
=
1)
and
elastic
supply
of
new
cars
of
two
qualities.
Mean

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

and Median

Consumer Surplus
Consumer Surplus, Baseline case

are
computed using only households with cars in the baseline case.
APPENDIX
In this Appendix, we report in more detail on the counterfactual case with multiple qualities
of new cars that we mention in Section 5.1.2. Speciﬁcally, we assume that manufacturers
supply competitively new cars of two qualities: a car of quality q0 (i.e., the same car supplied
in the benchmark case) and a car of quality equal to q5 (i.e., a car whose quality equals a
ﬁve-year old car of the benchmark case). The prices of these cars are equal to their prices
in the benchmark case: the high-quality car price is $21, 487, and the low-quality car price is
$7, 465 (note that this price is signiﬁcantly below that of any new car in the U.S. market).
Table 9 reports the quantitative results of this counterfactual case with prohibitive trans-
35


===== [PAGE 38] =====

Consumer Surplus, as a fraction of baseline
Percentile of Valuation θ
0
50
100
0
0.5
1
Fig. 6:
The ﬁgure displays counterfactual consumer surplus with prohibitive transaction costs
relative to baseline consumer surplus by percentile of valuation θ, elastic supply of new cars of two
qualities. Consumer surplus is calculated as the average value function before purchasing any car:
R 1
0 Vθ,α (T + 1, T + 1) dG (α).
action costs and an inﬁnitely elastic supply of new cars of two qualities. The top rows of
the table indicate that the output of the high-quality new good falls, whereas the cheaper,
low-quality good captures approximately 45 percent of total new-car sales, as households with
intermediate preferences substitute towards it. Overall, total new car output rises by 53 per-
cent relative to the baseline case, and by 25 percent relative to the analogous counterfactual
with a single new car (Table 5). The bottom rows of the table conﬁrm that the aggregate
welfare losses from prohibitive transaction costs are small. They are even smaller than in the
case with a single new car, since the low-quality new car provide households with an additional
margin of adjustment. Figure 6 displays the ratio between consumer surplus with prohibitive
transaction costs and consumer surplus in the baseline case for all households that acquire a
car in the baseline case, ranked by the percentile of their valuation θ, for this case of elastic
supply of two new cars. The ﬁgure shows that households with intermediate preferences suﬀer
very small losses, because the lower-quality new goods allow these households to obtain qual-
ities that are closer to their target qualities of the benchmark case. However, households at
the bottom of the distribution still suﬀer large welfare losses, because low-quality new goods
are still too expensive for these consumers relative to very old used goods.
36


===== [PAGE 39] =====

References
[1] Adda, J. and R. Cooper, “Balladurette and Juppette: A Discrete Analysis of Scrapping
Subsidies,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 108, No. 4 (Aug., 2000), pp. 778-806.
[2] Anderson, A. and V. Ginsburgh, “Price discrimination via second-hand markets,” Euro-
pean Economic Review, Vol. 38, Issue 1 (Jan., 1994), pp. 23-44.
[3] Attanasio, O., “Consumer Durables and Inertial Behaviour: Estimation and Aggregation
of (S, s) Rules for Automobile Purchases,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 67, No.
4 (Oct., 2000), pp. 667-696.
[4] Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes,“Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,” Econo-
metrica, Vol. 63, No. 4 (July, 1995), pp. 841-890.
[5] Bond, E., “Trade in Used Equipment with Heterogeneous Firms,” The Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 91, No. 4. (Aug., 1983), pp. 688-705.
[6] Bresnahan, T., “Competition and Collusion in the American Automobile Market: The
1955 Price War,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. XXXV, No. 4 (June, 1987), pp.
457-482.
[7] Chen, J., S. Esteban, and M. Shum, “When Do Secondary Markets Harm Firms?” Amer-
ican Economic Review, Vol. 103, No. 7 (December, 2013), pp. 2911-2934.
[8] Clerides, S., “Gains from trade in used goods: Evidence from automobiles,” Journal of
International Economics, Vol. 76, Issue 2 (Dec., 2008), pp. 322-336.
[9] Copeland, A. and J. Kahn, “The Production Impact of ‘Cash-for-Clunkers’: Implications
for Stabilization Policy,” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 51, No. 1 (January, 2013), pp. 288-303.
[10] Eberly, J.C., “Adjustment of Consumers’ Durables Stocks: Evidence from Automobile
Purchases,” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 102, No. 3 (Jun., 1994), pp. 403-436.
[11] Eisfeldt, A. and A. Rampini, “Capital reallocation and liquidity,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 53, Issue 3 (April, 2006), pp. 369-399.
[12] Eisfeldt, A. and A. Rampini, “New or Used?
Investment with Credit Constraints,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54, Issue 8, (Nov. 2007), pp. 2656-2681.
37


===== [PAGE 40] =====

[13] Esteban, S. and M. Shum, “Durable Goods Oligopoly with Secondary Markets: the Case
of Automobiles,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 38, Issue 2, (June, 2007), pp. 332-
354.
[14] Gavazza, A., “Leasing and Secondary Markets: Theory and Evidence from Commercial
Aircraft,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 119, No. 2 (April, 2011a), pp. 325-377.
[15] Gavazza, A., “The Role of Trading Frictions in Real Asset Markets,” American Economic
Review, Vol. 101, No. 4 (June, 2011b), pp. 1106-43.
[16] Gavazza, A., “An Empirical Equilibrium Model of a Decentralized Asset Market,” mimeo,
London School of Economics, (2013).
[17] Gilligan, T., “Lemons and Leases in the Used Business Aircraft Market,” The Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 112, No. 5, (Oct., 2004), pp. 1157-1180.
[18] Goldberg, P. and F. Verboven, “The Evolution of Price Dispersion in the European Car
Market,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 68, No. 4. (Oct., 2001), pp. 811-848.
[19] Goldberg, P. and F. Verboven, “Market Integration and Convergence to the Law of One
Price: Evidence from the European Car Market,” Journal of International Economics,
Vol. 65, Issue 1, (Jan., 2005), pp. 49-73.
[20] Greenspan, A. and D. Cohen, “Motor Vehicle Stocks, Scrappage, and Sales,” The Review
of Economic and Statistics, Vol. 81, No. 3 (August, 1999), pp. 369-383
[21] Hendel, I. and A. Lizzeri, “Adverse Selection in Durable Goods Markets,” The American
Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 5 (Dec., 1999a), pp. 1097-1115.
[22] Hendel, I. and A. Lizzeri, “Interfering with Secondary Markets,” RAND Journal of Eco-
nomics, Vol. 30, No. 1. (Spring, 1999b), pp. 1-21.
[23] Jovanovic, B. “Vintage Capital and Inequality,” Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 1,
Issue 2 (April, 1998), pp. 497-530.
[24] Jovanovic, B. “The Technology Cycle and Inequality,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol.
76, Issue 2 (April, 2009), pp. 707-729.
[25] Krueger, D. and F. Perri, “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality?
Evidence and Theory,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 73, No. 1 (January, 2006), pp.
163-193.
38


===== [PAGE 41] =====

[26] Miravete, E. and M. Moral, “Qualitative Eﬀects of ‘Cash for Clunkers’ Programs,” mimeo,
University of Texas at Austin, (2011).
[27] Petrin, A. “Quantifying the Beneﬁts of New Products: The Case of the Minivan,” Journal
of Political Economy, Vol. 110, No. 4. (Aug., 2002), pp. 705-729.
[28] Porter, R. and P. Sattler, “Patterns of Trade in the Market for Used Durables: Theory
and Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No. 7149, (1999).
[29] Pulvino, T., “Do Asset Fire Sales Exist?
An Empirical Investigation of Commercial
Aircraft Transactions,” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 53, No. 3 (Jun., 1998), pp. 939-978.
[30] Rust, J. “Stationary Equilibrium in a Market for Durable Assets,” Econometrica, Vol.
53, No. 4. (Jul., 1985), pp. 783-806.
[31] Schiraldi, P., “Automobile Replacement: a Dynamic Structural Approach,” The RAND
Journal of Economics, Vol. 42, Issue 2 (Summer, 2011), pp. 266-291.
[32] Stolyarov, D., “Turnover of Used Durables in a Stationary Equilibrium: Are Older Goods
Traded More?” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 110, No. 6, (Dec., 2002), pp. 1390-1413.
[33] Tirole, J., The Theory of Industrial Organization, (1988), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[34] Verboven, F., “International Price Discrimination in the European Car Market,” The
RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 27, No. 2 (Summer, 1996), pp. 240-268.
[35] Waldman, M. “Eliminating the Market for Secondhand Goods: An Alternative Explana-
tion for Leasing,” The Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. XL, No. 1, (Apr. 1997), pp.
63-91.
[36] Waldman, M. “Durable Goods Theory for Real World Markets,” The Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives, Vol. 17, No. 1. (Winter, 2003), pp. 131-154.
[37] Wang, Y. “Empirical Investigation of Eﬀects of Durability in the US Automobile Market,”
New York University, mimeo, (2008).
[38] Yurko, A. “From Consumer Incomes to Car Ages: How the Distribution of Income Aﬀects
the Distribution of Vehicle Vintages,” National Research University, mimeo, (2012).
39


===== [PAGE 42] =====

Online Appendix
In this Appendix, we show how to bridge the gap between the way we model consumer
heterogeneity and the way that previous empirical work on the auto market was capturing
it. Speciﬁcally, we let the heterogeneity of households’ preferences be given by θ = yǫ, where
y is household non-durable consumption and ǫ is a parameter that is a household-speciﬁc
preference component uncorrelated with y. From log θ = log y + log ǫ, we can estimate the
weights β on observable demographic characteristics X from the regression
log y = βX + η.
(4)
Thus, we can write
log θ = βX + ω
with ω = η+log ǫ is the unobservable component of “our” preferences and βX is the observable
component.
Moreover, we let households’ preferences for their second car be given by αθ, with α ≤1.
Hence, we can extend the previous procedure to obtain
log α + log θ = log α + βX + ω.
In the paper, we assume that α is an unobservable component, distributed in the population
according to a Beta distribution on [0, 1] with parameters that we calibrate (Section 4.2).
Alternatively, we can directly assume that preferences θ are composed by an observable
component φX and an observable part χ:
log θ = φX + χ.
(5)
In our model, a households hold at least one car if its preference parameter θ exceeds a ﬁxed
threshold. Denoting this constant threshold by θ∗, we obtain that:
Pr (household has at least one car) = Pr (θ > θ∗) = Pr (log θ > log θ∗)
= Pr (φX + χ −log θ∗> 0) .
Thus, by assuming that the distribution of χ is a normal distribution, we can obtain an
estimate of the weights φ normalized by the standard deviation σχ of χ by estimating a probit
regression.
Similarly, we could further decompose log α into an observable and an unobservable part
log α = µX + ν.
40


===== [PAGE 43] =====

Hence, we obtain
log α + log θ = µX + ν + φX + χ = πX + ζ
(6)
where the weights π = (µ + φ) are the sum of the weights of the observable demographic
characteristics X of θ and of α, and ζ = (ν + χ) is the sum of the unobservable components
of θ and of α. In our model, households hold more than one car only if their preferences αθ
exceed a ﬁxed threshold. Denoting this constant threshold by (αθ)∗, we obtain that:
Pr (household has more than one car) = Pr (αθ > (αθ)∗) = Pr (log α + log θ > log (αθ)∗)
= Pr (πX + ζ −log (αθ)∗> 0) .
Thus, by approximating the distribution of ζ with a normal distribution, we can obtain an
estimate of the weights π normalized by the standard deviation σζ of ζ by estimating a probit
regression.
Table 10 presents estimates of the coeﬃcients β of equation (4), of the coeﬃcients
φ
σχ of
equation (5), and of the coeﬃcients
π
σζ of equation (6). Columns (1)-(3) use CEX data to
estimate β,
φ
σχ and
π
σζ , respectively, for the U.S.; columns (4)-(6) use the Budget des Familles
to estimate β,
φ
σχ and
π
σζ , respectively, for France.
Interestingly, the signs of the coeﬃcients are the same in all speciﬁcations and, most
notably, in the two countries. Moreover, the magnitudes of several coeﬃcients in columns (1)
and (4) are fairly similar. The ratios of coeﬃcients in columns (2) and (5), and (3) and (6),
are quite comparable, as well.
Finally, we can recover the parameters σχ and σζ for each country by matching the overall
variances of θ and of αθ that we obtained in our calibration. More speciﬁcally, the calibration
for the U.S. yields
var (log θ) = var (log y) + var (log ǫ) = .632 + 1.162 = 1.7425.
The probit in column (2) yields
var
log θ
σχ

= 1
σ2χ
var (log θ) = var
φX
σχ

+ var
 χ
σχ

= .732 + 1 = 1.5387.
Thus, we obtain σχ = 1.064 for the U.S. Similarly, the calibration for the U.S. further yields:
var (log α) + var (log θ) = .1126 + 1.7425 = 1.8551.
The probit in column (3) yields
var
log α + log θ
σζ

= 1
σ2
ζ
(var (log α) + var (log θ)) = var
πX
σζ

+var
 ζ
σζ

= .8402+1 = 1.7056.
41


===== [PAGE 44] =====

Table 10: The Role of Demographic Characteristics
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Age of HoH
.02020
(.00257)
.04170
(.00741)
.06065
(.00644)
.01298
(.00173)
.06527
(.00618)
.07087
(.00664)
Age of HoH Squared
−.00015
(.00002)
−.00036
(.00007)
−.00053
(.00006)
−.00013
(.00002)
−.00071
(.00005)
−.00075
(.00006)
Family Size
.14192
(.00517)
.15661
(.02299)
.29717
(.01721)
.11328
(.00412)
.02554
(.02102)
.11701
(.01309)
Log(Household Income)
.25593
(.01312)
.33555
(.02901)
.37009
(.03172)
.56052
(.01026)
.74048
(.04093)
.84257
(.03285)
Female of HoH
−.02282
(.01315)
−.22848
(.04821)
−.37675
(.03713)
−.07692
(.01212)
−.79305
(.04025)
−.88508
(.05229)
Years of Education of HoH .03464
(.00232)
.07730
(.00799)
.02623
(.00658)
.00852
(.00122)
.03988
(.00528)
.02170
(.00442)
White HoH
.12881
(.01737)
.66808
(.05588)
.42870
(.05252)
N/A
N/A
N/A
Rural Household
.03027
(.02018)
.37252
(.10007)
.48267
(.06722)
.02924
(.00912)
.68264
(.04819)
.50767
(.03360)
Dummies for Geography
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
N/A
N/A
R2
.465
.594
log-Likelihood
−1, 705.26 −3, 136.32
−3, 180.94 −4, 837.81
# Obs.
5, 886
5, 886
5, 886
10, 305
10, 305
10, 305
Notes: Columns (1) and (4) report OLS estimates of the coeﬃcients β in equation (4); the dependent variable is
the log of the household’s non-durable consumption. Columns (2) and (5) report maximum likelihood estimates
of the coeﬃcients
φ
σχ in equation (5); the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the household holds
at least one car. Columns (3) and (6) report maximum likelihood estimates of the coeﬃcients
π
σζ in equation
(6); the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the household holds more than one car. Columns
(1)-(3) use CEX data for the U.S.; columns (4)-(6) use the Budget des Familles for France. HoH means head
of household. N/A means that the variable is not reported in the dataset.
42


===== [PAGE 45] =====

Thus, we obtain σζ = 1.042 for the U.S.
Similar calculations yield σχ = .791 and σζ = .746 for France.
Interestingly, this procedure delivers that unobservable heterogeneity plays a larger role in
the U.S. than in France, as we found in our calibrations of Sections 4 and 6, respectively.
43
