

===== [PAGE 1] =====

Vol.:(0123456789)
Environmental and Resource Economics (2024) 87:1783–1844
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-024-00872-z
1 3
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First 
Decade with Mass‑Consumption of Electric Vehicles
Gøril L. Andreassen1 · Jo Thori Lind2
Accepted: 17 April 2024 / Published online: 28 May 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Adoption of low-carbon technology is key to mitigating climate change. A possible 
unwanted consequence of fast technological progress is that products get outdated before 
their technical lifetime is over. We investigate whether the market value of electric vehi-
cles, characterized by rapid technological progress, declines faster over their lifetime than 
gasoline vehicles, which represent a mature technology. We use novel data from Norway, 
the market with the highest market shares for electric vehicles in the world. The data are 
from the largest web platform for secondhand vehicles over the period 2011–2021. Prices 
of electric vehicles decline faster than gasoline vehicles. This seems to be driven by the 
electric vehicles with below median driving range. We hypothesize that the large price 
drop is mainly due to the fast technological improvement of electric vehicles.
Keywords  Electric vehicles · Energy transition · Low-carbon technologies · Secondhand 
market · Technological progress
JEL  D12 · L60 · L62 · O33 · Q55
We would like to thank Knut Einar Rosendahl, Maria Nareklishvili, Askill Harkjerr Halse and Svenn 
Jensen, as well as seminar participants at School of Economics and Business, NMBU, the Institute of 
Transport Economics and at the TRIPOP workshop for valuable comments. We are grateful to finn.no, 
Kjell Magne Aalbergsjø in The Norwegian Road Federation (OFV) and Erik Lorentzen and colleagues 
in the Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association for supplying data and sharing information. Please see 
disclosure statement online.
 *	 Gøril L. Andreassen 
	
goril.louise.andreassen@nmbu.no
	
Jo Thori Lind 
	
j.t.lind@econ.uio.no
1	
School of Economics and Business, Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU), PB 5003, 
1432   Ås, Norway
2	
Department of Economics, University of Oslo, Blindern, PB 1095 , 0317  Oslo, Norway


===== [PAGE 2] =====

1784
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
1  Introduction
Widespread deployment and continued progress of low-carbon technologies are crucial to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions (Barrett 2009; Stock 2020; Pathak et al. 2022; Dhakal 
et al. 2022). The adoption of low-carbon small-scale technologies, such as electric vehi-
cles and solar power, has accelerated the last decade. These technologies have improved 
fast, both regarding performance and costs (e.g. Pathak et al. 2022). Better and cheaper 
low-carbon technologies enable more consumers to take part in the energy transition—but 
also make existing goods obsolete faster than before. We investigate how the market values 
technology throughout the lifetime when the technology is rapidly improving.
In this paper, we specifically investigate the case of electric vehicles. For electric vehi-
cles, the most important improvement the last decade is the increased driving range, which 
is due to better and cheaper batteries. This has also allowed production of larger models 
catering to a larger range of consumers. Gasoline vehicles, on the other hand, is a mature 
technology. We find the price path of a car over its lifetime by looking at cars of the same 
model year, make and fuel sold secondhand at different ages. To study the effect of particu-
larly rapid technological progress on market prices, we compare the price path for ten-year-
old electric vehicles and gasoline vehicles.
Improved technology performance and cost reduction are often necessary to increase 
technology adoption for low-carbon technologies. But for durable goods technological pro-
gress can be a paradox. As the resale value may be lower if the newest technology available 
is much better and cheaper than the used technology, this increases the total cost of own-
ership. How much better the newest technology has to be compared to the used technol-
ogy to lower the resale value is an empirical question. We investigate this specifically for 
electric compared to gasoline vehicles, using driving range as a proxy for technological 
improvement. The valuation of used technology is relevant for other durable, low-carbon, 
small-scale technologies as well, such as solar power. The potentially reduced resale value 
for low-carbon technologies with large technological progress need to be factored in when 
estimating the cost of climate policies.
The Norwegian market is the most mature electric vehicle market in the world (IEA 
2022), so this is a good test bed for the future of the market for electric cars worldwide. 
The market share for battery electric vehicles has been above 10% of new car purchases 
since 2014 and was 82% in 2023 (OFV 2024).1 We use a novel data set from the largest 
web platform for secondhand vehicles in Norway, finn.no, accounting for close to 90% of 
the market, over the years 2011-June 2021. At this platform, the electric vehicle share of 
the market for vehicles that are 10 years or younger has been above 1% since 2013 and is 
23% as of June 2021. The time period 2011–2021 covers the years where electric vehicles 
have been an important part of the Norwegian market.
The technology shift in the Norwegian car market is a prediction of what may happen in 
other countries if batteries continue to fall in price and policies promoting electric vehicles 
and charging infrastructure continue. Other important car markets are less than 10 years 
behind Norway in the electric vehicle adoption.
We find that used electric vehicles decline faster in price than used gasoline vehicles. 
This finding is robust to various specifications. The difference in the price fall seems to be 
driven by electric vehicles with driving range below 200 km (close to the median range 
1  As of June 2021, where our analysis ends, the market share was 57%.


===== [PAGE 3] =====

1785
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
in our sample). The price pattern of electric cars with the highest driving ranges are more 
similar to those of gasoline cars.
To understand the difference in the price decline between the two technologies, we first 
develop a theoretical framework based on the model of Stolyarov (2002) of the resale pat-
tern of durable goods. As electric cars are based on less mature technologies than cars 
based on combustion engines, technological progress is faster. This reduces the utility of 
used cars relative to that of a new car, and hence leads to reduced demand and increased 
supply of secondhand cars. To maintain equilibrium in the market of used cars when the 
technology is improving, the price of used cars has to decrease. Hence the price of electric 
vehicles drops faster compared to gasoline vehicles.
This paper contributes thematically to three different strands of the literature, namely, 
technological development, durable goods and the car market. In growth theory there is a 
literature on how technological progress evolves endogenously as resources are spent on R 
&D (e.g. Aghion and Howitt 1998). This can also be extended to the interaction between 
technological change and environmental policy (e.g. Acemoglu et al. 2012). In this paper, 
however, we take the technological process as exogenously given. Indeed, our work relates 
more closely to the work on vintage capital where technological progress only affects the 
economy through new capital—and where every vintage of capital is marked by the period 
in which it was produced (Solow et al. 1966). As technology is embedded in the car, this 
leads to questions of optimal replacement of capital (Rust 1987). In the case of rapid tech-
nological change, as is the case for electric vehicles, there is also a question of how expec-
tations about future technological improvements affect the choice between adopting tech-
nology today or waiting for improved technology (Rosenberg 1976; Balcer and Lippman 
1984). De Groote and Verboven (2019) a case resembling our case, household’s investment 
decision in solar power, where both quality is increasing and prices decreasing over time.
Cars are one of the prime examples of durable goods. Waldman (2003) reviews much of 
the early literature on durable goods, including theories of optimal durability of goods, the 
effects of a secondhand market on the new goods market, and information problems in the 
secondhand market. A study that in many ways is close to ours is the one by Fudenberg and 
Tirole (1998). They consider a monopolist selling goods in two periods with improvements 
in quality between the two periods. Their focus, however, is on the behavior of the monop-
olist selling the new good and taking the secondhand market for given whereas we focus on 
the secondhand market. In a seminal contribution close to our theoretical approach, Stol-
yarov (2002) develops a model of the resale pattern of durable goods. Goods are purchased 
new at a fixed price and the quality of the product deteriorates over time. He studies more 
complex deterioration patterns and markets with many vintages. To focus on the effect of 
different types of technology, we only include old and new varieties.
There is a vast literature on the demand for cars. One starting point is Akerlof’s (1970) 
seminal theoretical study, which in itself is not very relevant to our study. This study was 
followed up by Bond (1982, 1983), who studied the demand for used pickup trucks empiri-
cally. To see whether bad cars are driving out good ones from the secondhand market, he 
investigates whether secondhand trucks require more maintenance than otherwise similar 
trucks bought new. He does not find any difference between first- and secondhand bought 
trucks. This is one of the first empirical studies of car price behavior.
The newer empirical literature on the demand for automobiles is heavily inspired by the 
study by Berry et al. (1995). In their study, however, they only consider the static demand 


===== [PAGE 4] =====

1786
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
for new cars. A number of extensions have been suggested in the literature.2 Our empirical 
approach is most closely related to the approach followed by Purohit (1992). He estimates 
the effect of changes such as major styling changes, downsizing and changes in horse-
power, in new cars on the price of used cars and finds that enhanced features of new cars 
increases the obsolescence effect of used cars. The changes he studies, however, are minor 
compared to the technological changes electric vehicles have experienced the last decade.
Our paper is also closely related to the literature on the evolution of the price of used 
durable goods, particularly cars, over time.3 Wykoff (1970) studies the declining price of 
selected car models to study the shape of the depreciation function. A number of other 
studies has corroborated the declining price pattern of both secondhand and new cars 
over time (Porter and Sattler 1999; Esteban and Shum 2007; Copeland et al. 2011). But 
as should be obvious from the date of these studies, they only study cars with combustion 
engines.
Schloter (2022) investigates the depreciation rate of electric vehicles compared to gaso-
line vehicles, and finds that electric vehicles depreciate faster than gasoline vehicles. He 
draws on web scraped data on prices of nine car makes from multiple countries collected in 
2020 and 2021. In comparison we cover the whole used car market on finn.no (which again 
covers around 90% of the used car market in Norway), while Schloter (2022) ends up only 
looking at electric vehicles in Norway. Moreover, as we have the whole used car market 
for ten years in a country that is far ahead on the electric vehicle transition, it gives a more 
complete picture of the evolution of the market for electric cars although we are limited to 
a single country. Reassuringly, Schloter (2022) finds the same pattern of prices of electric 
vehicles decline faster than the price than gasoline vehicles that we find. We also have data 
on the range of the vehicle models and find that the fast price decline of electric vehicles 
seem to be driven by vehicles with below median range.
Also related to our study, Sallee et al. (2016) use used car prices in their analysis, but 
investigate whether consumers recognize the value of fuel economy. Also Strittmatter and 
Lechner (2020) use similar data, investigating whether there is sorting in the secondhand 
car market based on environmental quality.
Finally, there is an emerging literature on the demand for electric and “green” cars.4 
Muehlegger and Rapson (2022) study the effect of a subsidy of electric vehicles in Califor-
nia and find a quite high price elasticity where low- and middle-income households benefit 
2  Schiraldi (2011) introduce a dynamic element to this class of models. In his model, consumers decide 
whether to sell or replace their car in every period, and the supply of new cars is constant over time. 
Gavazza et al. (2014) provide a model of the household’s decision about which cars to buy, hold, and sell in 
the secondhand market in a framework based on Stolyarov (2002). Gillingham et al. (2022) develop a com-
putationally tractable dynamic equilibrium model of the car market with heterogeneous consumers.
3  There is also a literature on technological progress and improvement of durable goods focusing on other 
goods than cars. Gowrisankaran and Rysman (2012) provides a general model of such markets, while there 
are specific studies on e.g. computer CPUs (Gordon 2009) and computer games (Ishihara and Ching 2019).
4  Glerum et al. (2014) provides a forecast of future demand for electric vehicles using stated preference 
survey data. Survey data has also been studied in more sophisticated modelling frameworks (Liu and Cirillo 
2017), and there are studies of specific characteristics such as battery capacity (Danielis et al. 2019). Arch-
smith et al. (2022) document that the demand for electric vehicles in the US is closely related to environ-
mental preferences, and Holland et al. (2021) build a quantitative model to analyze how different policies 
affect the transition to electric cars. Brückmann et al. (2021) survey whether fear of not being able to resell 
an electric vehicle reduces demand for electric vehicles, finding that consumers expect a higher resale value 
for electric vehicles than conventional cars.


===== [PAGE 5] =====

1787
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
the most from the subsidy. There is also a literature on provision of incentives to replace 
polluting cars with newer varieties.5
Our first contribution is to present empirical results that indicate that the price paths of 
goods that have a large technological improvement each year is different than for goods 
that do not have large technological improvements from year to year. Second, we contrib-
ute to the state of knowledge on the electric vehicle market. Investigating the price path of 
electric vehicles during the lifetime with information from the most mature electric vehicle 
market in the world has not been done before and is relevant since this is a technology that 
probably will be phased into the car market globally the coming decade. Third, we inform 
the estimation of the cost of climate policy since valuation of the used low-carbon technol-
ogy is part of the cost.
The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows. First, we give background informa-
tion about the car market in Sect. 2. In Sect. 3 we present our theoretical framework that 
we use to make a hypothesis about the cause of the findings. Further, we present the data, 
descriptive statistics and the empirical strategy in Sect. 4. In Sect. 5 we present and discuss 
the results and in Sect. 6 we conclude.
2  Background on the Car Market
An extraordinary technology shift is expected to happen in the car market. Both the EU 
and California aim to only sell zero emission passenger cars from 2035 and on wards. A 
car lasts for 15–20 years. For the car fleet to transition to zero emission vehicles, the market 
share for zero emission vehicles among the new cars sold need to increase first. A large 
part of this shift has already happened in the Norwegian car market over the last decade. 
The share of different types of vehicles sold in Norway from 2011 to 2021 can be seen in 
Fig. 1a. From having 96% market share in 2011, gasoline and diesel vehicles have plum-
meted to a 10% market share. Electric vehicles have increased from a 1.5% market share in 
2011 to 57% by June 2021.6
The high sale volumes of new electric vehicles extends into the secondhand vehicle 
market, but naturally there is some delay. The fuel share of the secondhand vehicle mar-
ket in Norway in 2011–2021 can be seen in Fig. 1b, where we for each year show the fuel 
share of all cars that are below 10 years old that are advertised on the web platform finn.
no.7 The share of electric vehicles hits 1% in 2014, and reached 23% by June 2021. The left 
part of the graph for new vehicles (Fig. 1a) from 2011 to 2017 looks similar to the right 
part of the graph for used vehicles from 2014 to June 2021 (Fig. 1b).
The sale shares of electric vehicles in the USA, Korea and Canada in 2021 are equal 
to the sale shares of new electric vehicles in Norway about ten years ago (IEA 2022).8 
5  Adda and Cooper (2000) present a theoretical model with simulations to study the effect of a subsidy 
program in France. Li et al. (2020) and Mian and Sufi (2012) provide an analysis of the Cash-for-Clunkers 
program whereas Guan (2021) analyze the CARS program, both in the US. Chen et al. (2021) examine the 
effect of a subsidy program to fuel-efficient cars in China, while Springel (2021) investigates whether subsi-
dies to electric vehicles or charging stations are most important.
6  Note that we do not include plug-in hybrids in the electric vehicle category. When we refer to electric 
vehicles, this is battery electric vehicles. For battery electric and plug-in hybrids the sale share in 2021 
(until June) is 80%.
7  We use the term fuel also about electric vehicles, all though strictly speaking electricity is not a fuel.
8  Note again that this is battery electric vehicles, excluding plug-in hybrids.


===== [PAGE 6] =====

1788
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Globally the sale share of electric vehicles in 2021 is equal to the sale shares in Norway in 
2013, while China and Europe are ahead of the USA and have sale shares for electric vehi-
cles in 2021 equal to the sale shares in Norway in 2013–2014 (IEA 2022). The Netherlands 
have sale shares for electric vehicles in 2021 that are equal to the Norwegian sale shares 
in 2017 (IEA 2022) while Iceland has sale shares for electric vehicles in 2021 that match 
the Norwegian 2018 numbers (The Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association 2022b). Thus, 
these markets are less than 10 years behind Norway in the electric vehicle roll-out.
Driving range has increased considerably since the market of electric vehicles started to 
grow in the beginning of the 2010s. In addition, comfort of electric vehicles has increased 
and the variety of vehicle models available has expanded. In Fig. 2 we see the number of 
Fig. 1   Sale shares by technology for new and second hand cars in the Norwegian market 2011–2021. Data 
for 2021 covers January–June
Fig. 2   Number of available electric vehicle models for sale. Data for 2021 is as by June 2021. Large vehi-
cles are defined as station wagon, SUV, pickup and multipurpose vehicles. Small vehicles are sedan, hatch-
back, coupe and cabriolet. These are models that are imported by the car manufacturers official seller net-
work. Imported models from other actors are not included here


===== [PAGE 7] =====

1789
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
electric vehicle models available in the Norwegian market until June 2021. The black line 
is the total number of electric vehicle models available, while the dotted line is the number 
of large electric vehicle models available. We see that around 50 electric vehicle models 
are available in the Norwegian car market. As a comparison there are 153 different models 
available in 2020 for gasoline vehicles. Thus, the electric vehicle market is maturing, but it 
is not fully mature yet.
3  Theoretical Framework
There are several explanations for why prices of cars decline over time. One obvious expla-
nation is depreciation. Our study encompasses this effect, but the main focus is on the 
effect of technological progress. Gasoline vehicles is a mature technology where we expect 
technological progress to be slower than for electric cars. To fix ideas on the effect of these 
two factors, we present a simple version of Stolyarov’s (2002) model tailored to the sec-
ondhand market for cars. This is a dynamic model with an infinite time-horizon for the 
consumers. We focus on the steady state of the model, i.e. the situation where the number 
of buyers and sellers of new and used cars is constant over time.
A car has a characteristic x we refer to as its quality. The market consists of a continuum 
of consumers each described by a parameter h which indicates their valuation of cars. The 
parameter h follows a distribution over some interval Ω ⊆ℝ+ with cumulative distribution 
function F. We assume no holes and no mass points. A consumer with characteristic h has 
an instantaneous utility over cars of quality x and consumption c given by
where consumption is the income not spent on car purchases. For simplicity and without 
loss of generality, utility from other consumption is disregarded in what follows. Consum-
ers have a common discount factor 훽∈(0, 1).
Cars last for two periods. In the first period, they provide a quality xn . The second 
period, they deteriorate and provide quality xu = 휇xn with 휇∈(0, 1) . After two periods, the 
car provides no further benefit.
3.1  The Market for Cars Without Technological Progress
Consider first the market for cars that do not have technological progress. This can be 
seen as conventional cars. The technology in this market is mature, and a new car has 
the same utility characteristic xn every period. New cars are sold at some exogenously 
given price pn . This could correspond to a small country that acts as a price taker in the 
global market for cars or a competitive car industry with constant returns to scale. Used 
cars are traded in the secondhand market at a price pu.
Assume initially that everybody needs a car. Consumers in the market have three 
options. They can each period buy a new car and sell it after one period, they can buy 
a new car and drive it for two periods, or they can every period buy a used car. Let 
UN , UK , and UO denote the utility of these options. Notice that the K group has no 
impact on the market for secondhand cars except from being an outside option. The 
main reason for keeping a car throughout it’s lifetime rather than either always buying 
new or secondhand cars may be transaction costs. To avoid having to model transaction 
costs explicitly, we assume that consumers can commit to a two period strategy. Then 
(1)
U = xh + c,


===== [PAGE 8] =====

1790
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
consumers with moderately strong preference for new cars will chose the intermediate 
strategy, which acts as a mixing strategy.
We have
The utilities as function of h are illustrated in Fig. 3.
Consumers, differentiated though their index h, then choose the option N, K, or O 
that suits their preferences the best. We solve the model by letting consumers make a 
plan for two periods. The outcome is, however, dynamically consistent so no consumer 
would like to change her mind in the second period. Whenever the price of secondhand 
cars is below the price of new cars ( pu < pn ), consumer with h = 0 prefers O over K 
and K over N. As the slope of the utility functions is steeper for the latter two, however, 
consumers with high valuation of car quality (high h) chooses option N, consumers with 
intermediate h chooses option K, and low valuation consumers choose option O. Spe-
cifically, there are levels h and ̄h so consumers with h < h chooses O, consumers with 
h < h < ̄h chooses K, and consumers with h > ̄h chooses N. The parameters are defined 
by indifference, so
yielding
Equilibrium in the market for secondhand cars requires that pu is chosen so the number 
of sellers and buyers of secondhand cars, i.e. the groups N and O, are equal. Using the 
assumption that the quality of cars deteriorate by a factor 휇 so xu = 휇xn , this yields the 
equilibrium condition
Implicit differentiation of this expression yields
Hence, as we should expect, if the quality of a car retained after a period increases, the 
price of secondhand cars also increases. It could also be the case that some parameters of 
the model are unknown to the consumer. Particularly the quality of a used car may be chal-
lenging to observe, as explored e.g. in the famous market for lemons (Akerlof 1970). This 
(2)
UN = xnh −pn + 훽(xnh −pn + pu)
(3)
UK = xnh −pn + 훽xuh
(4)
UO = xuh −pu + 훽(xuh −pu)
xuh −pu + 𝛽(xuh −pu) = xnh −pn + 𝛽xuh
xn̄h −pn + 𝛽(xn̄h −pn + pu) = xn̄h −pn + 𝛽xūh
h = pn −(1 + 𝛽)pu
xn −xu
̄h = pn −pu
xn −xu
.
(5)
F
(pn −(1 + 훽)pu
(1 −휇)xn
)
= 1 −F
( pn −pu
(1 −휇)xn
)
(6)
𝜕pu
𝜕𝜇=
f(
h)
h + f
(̄h
)̄h
(1 + 𝛽)f(h) + f(̄h)xn > 0.


===== [PAGE 9] =====

1791
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
would imply that a risk averse consumer achieves lower ex ante utility from a secondhand 
vehicle, and this could be modelled as a higher quality degradation factor 휇.
For the case of electric cars, there is a worry that the battery capacity is declining over 
time. Usually, batteries will lose one to two percent of their capacity each year (Nichols 
2022), but this depends on how the car is used and charged. There may also be a popular 
belief that battery degradation is stronger than it actually is. In the model, we can model 
battery degradation as 휇 being lower for electric cars than for gasoline cars, and hence hav-
ing a price that declines faster. With risk averse consumers, this would also be the case if 
there is higher uncertainty about the degradation of electric vehicles than gasoline vehicles.
So far in the analysis, we have assumed that all consumers need a car, hence implicitly 
that the utility of not owning a car is sufficiently low. In many settings, other means of 
transportation can be a suitable alternative. To include this in the model, we can introduce 
an outside opportunity of not owning a car yielding a utility level U . A full analysis of this 
case can be found in Appendix A.1. This change to the model does not change any quali-
tative insights from the model, so to maintain simplicity we disregard the presence of an 
outside opportunity for the rest of the paper.
The solution studied above is a steady state where the price of secondhand cars remains 
stable. This is a reasonable description of a mature market. However, at the first introduc-
tion of cars to the market, there were of course no secondhand car initially. Subsequently 
the economy converged to an economy where the three groups N, K, and O obtained stable 
sizes and hence that prices stabilized. We do not think that this dynamic is particularly 
enlightening to study formally.
Fig. 3   Utility of various car ownership strategies by h 


===== [PAGE 10] =====

1792
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
3.2  The Market for Cars with Technological Progress
Consider now a market for cars with technological progress, i.e. that the utility of a new 
car is increasing over time. This market can for example be the case of electric cars. The 
technological progress can be the general comfort of driving the car, but maybe more 
relevant is the car’s driving range and battery capacity. We use this extension to study 
the market for electric cars and compare the market for secondhand electric and conven-
tional cars. For analytical tractability, we disregard interaction between the two markets.
To account for technological progress, we assume that the utility characteristic xn of 
a new car increases by a rate 𝛾> 1 every period. Seen from a specific period where new 
cars have quality xn , next period’s new cars have quality 훾xn whereas new cars last 
period were sold with quality xn
훾 . We still maintain the assumption of a constant price pn 
of new cars and study how the price of secondhand cars depend on the rate of techno-
logical progress 훾.
This implies two changes for the consumers’ choice of car ownership option. Con-
sumers always buying new cars (N) face an improved car technology next period, 
increasing their willingness to sell their used car on the secondhand market. Consumers 
always buying used cars (O) face an obsolete used car in every period, reducing their 
utility of the strategy. The new utilities of the three options become
This yields the cut offs
and the equilibrium condition becomes
An increase in the rate of technological progress initially reduces the utility of the 
O option and increases the utility of the N option as illustrated in Fig. 4. The utility 
profile of options N and O shifts to UN′ and UO′ . This leads to reductions in both h and 
̄h to levels h′ and ̄h′ . The first effect leads to reduced demand for secondhand cars, the 
second effect to increased supply. To maintain equilibrium, the price of used cars has to 
decrease. Specifically, we show in Appendix A.2 that
(7)
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪⎩
UN = xnh −pn + 훽[훾xnh −pn + pu]
UK = xnh −pn + 훽휇xnh
UO = 휇
훾xnh −pu + 훽(휇xnh −pu).
h = pn −(1 + 𝛽)pu
(
1 −𝜇
𝛾
)
xn
̄h =
pn −pu
(𝛾−𝜇)xn
(8)
F
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
pn −(1 + 훽)pu

1 −휇
훾

xn
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
= 1 −F
 pn −pu
(훾−휇)xn



===== [PAGE 11] =====

1793
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
To see how the speed of technological progress 훾 affects the size of the secondhand market, 
we can study d̄h
d𝛾 . As shown in Appendix A.2, the total effect of increased technological pro-
gress on the cut-off for always purchasing a new car can be written as
As (1 + 𝛽)𝛾̄h > 𝜇
𝛾h , we get d̄h
d𝛾< 0.
The increase in 훾 increases the utility of new cars and hence tends to reduce ̄h as more 
consumers enter into the N segment. This is the effect illustrated in Fig. 4. To maintain 
equilibrium, the fraction of consumers who always buy used cars (U) increase equiva-
lently, whereas the fraction of consumers who buy new cars and stick with them (K) 
declines. This is partially offset by a reduction in pu as it increases the relative price of 
a new car. This effect, however, is a consequence of the first effect and hence cannot 
dominate.
This finding is intuitive because the utility of owning a new car increases with techno-
logical progress and therefore more people than without technological progress decide to 
not stick with the car they bought for two periods, but rather decide to buy a new car each 
period. These are the consumers with quite high values of h, the utility weight on the car’s 
quality.
(9)
dpu
d𝛾= −x0
f(h)h 𝜇
𝛾+ f(̄h)̄h
f(h)(1 + 𝛽)(𝛾) + f(̄h)
< 0
d̄h
d𝛾= −
f(h)
(𝛾−𝜇) ×
(1 + 𝛽)𝛾̄h −𝜇
𝛾h
f(h)(1 + 𝛽)𝛾+ f(̄h)
Fig. 4   The effect of technologi-
cal progress on the utility of car 
ownership strategies. The dashed 
lines indicate the shift in utility 
resulting from an increase in the 
rate of technological progress 훾 . 
Subsequent price effects are not 
shown
UO
UK
UN
h
U
UO'
UN'
h
h
h'
h'


===== [PAGE 12] =====

1794
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
With the price decline for used cars, consumers who in the market without technologi-
cal progress would buy a new car in the first period and stick with it for the next, decide to 
rather buy used cars in both periods. These are the consumers with quite low levels of h. 
The model therefore predicts larger turnover and a larger secondhand market for cars when 
there is large technological progress.
3.3  Multiple Vehicle Technologies in the Same Market
The market we study empirically consists of cars using different fuel types, where our main 
focus is the difference between electric and gasoline cars. In the model above, we model 
these as cars where technological progress is still ongoing (immature technologies) and 
models where technological progress to a larger extent has stagnated (mature technolo-
gies). Hence, the consumer has a choice not only between a new and a secondhand car, but 
also between models where technological progress differs. We do not present a full model 
of this case but discuss how the preceding framework can be used to understand it.
If the models with technological progress maintain a constant rate of technological 
improvement, they will eventually completely fill the market at the expense of cars without 
technological progress. A complete model would have to take this into account, modelling 
the technological progress as a transition towards a steady state with mature technology 
that remains at a constant level. We limit ourselves to an informal discussion.
To model that there are consumers preferring both types of cars, we extend the model to 
the utility function of driving a car with immature technology to
where 휖 , the net utility of the immature technology compared to the mature technology, has 
a distribution in the population. In general, 휖 can take on any real value indicating either a 
preference in the direction of mature or immature technologies. This term can be related to 
technology specific preferences, characteristics such as noise or emission level as well as 
social image associated with the technology. The utility of driving a car with mature tech-
nology remains the same. The prices of new cars of both types are given exogenously. We 
now find six choice sets for consumers. Consumers can purchase a new car every period 
and sell it in the secondhand market at the end of the period (N), purchase a used car in the 
secondhand market every period (O), or purchase a new car every second period and keep 
it for two periods (K). In all three cases, the consumer can buy a car with mature (m) or 
immature ( 
¬m ) technology.
As above, an interesting experiment is to study the effect of increased technologi-
cal progress 훾 on the various prices. As for the case with only immature technologies, 
an increase in 훾 makes it more attractive to purchase an 
¬m type car, moving consumers 
from K ¬m to N ¬m . Second, the increase in 훾 makes new 
¬m cars more attractive than new 
m cars, moving some consumers from Nm to N ¬m . Both effects increases the supply of 
secondhand 
¬m cars. The second effect also reduces the supply of secondhand m cars. To 
maintain equilibrium in the markets for secondhand cars, we need increased demand of 
secondhand 
¬m cars. Hence, the price of secondhand 
¬m cars goes down.
We should also see an increase in the price of secondhand m cars as their supply is 
reduced. Hence as long as electric cars undergo more rapid technological progress than 
gasoline cars, we expect the price of secondhand electric cars to decrease relative the 
price of secondhand gasoline cars.
U = xh + c + 휖,


===== [PAGE 13] =====

1795
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
4  Data, Descriptive Statistics and Empirical Strategy
4.1  Data
In our analysis we use a novel data set from the largest web platform for secondhand vehi-
cles in Norway, finn.no, which accounts for close to 90% of the secondhand car market. 
This is the first time the data is used for this kind of analysis. Finn.no provided us with the 
data.
The data cover the period January 2011 to June 20 2021. We start our analysis in 2011 
because the Nissan Leaf was introduced to the Norwegian market at the end of this year.9 
Nissan Leaf being the first modern electric five-seat vehicle to be produced for the mass 
market from a major manufacturer, this corresponds to the start of the mass market for 
electric cars in Norway.
We analyze passenger vehicles sold as new in 2011 or later. This means that we only 
have vehicles that are 10 years or younger in our analysis. The total number of observations 
in the data is 5.5 million, yielding on average 500,000 ads for secondhand vehicles on finn.
no each year. Around 2.9 million cars are older than 10 years and around 1.2 of the 2.6 
million that are left have been advertized with less than 3 month in between, and we define 
them as duplicates and only use the newest ad. Then the total number of observations is 1.4 
million. The vehicles that are gasoline or electric vehicles and 10 years or younger are in 
total around 545,000 observations. The number and shares of vehicles of the different fuels 
can be seen in Appendix Table 6.
In addition to the data from the online platform, we have list prices for new vehicles 
from The Norwegian Road Federation (OFV). The Norwegian Road Federation is a mem-
bership organization for car importers, transport companies and other actors within trans-
portation, and have a role as producer of statistics about the car sale in Norway. They also 
gather price information from the car importers and delivers the official list prices to the 
tax authorities that use them to calculate wealth tax. The data from The Norwegian Road 
Federation also categorizes the vehicles into different body style categories.10
Further, we have information about the driving range of the electric vehicles, collected 
from the Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association’s website that informs about the different 
electric vehicle models (The Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association 2022a).11 We also 
have access to a survey of Norwegian electric vehicle owners conducted by the Norwegian 
Electric Vehicle Association. There is around 15,000 respondents in the survey.12 Addi-
tional details about the data and the variables can be found in Appendix B.
Notice that information on some variables is incomplete. From the platform data, we 
have the ask prices, but not the price the vehicle is actually sold for as there can be hag-
gling over the prices. However, measurement error in the outcome variable is generally 
9  Nissan Leaf was first sold to the Japanese and American market in the end of 2010.
10  The vehicle body is the main supporting structure of the car (such as windows, doors, engine cover, roof 
and luggage cover) and defines the shape and the size of the car. The body style can be used to classify the 
car market into different segments or size classes. However, in Europe there is no official definition of size 
classes based on objective criteria. See Appendix B.2.3 for more details on this issue.
11  The standard for measuring driving range is WLTP and if NEDC is the only number available, we 
reduce the driving range by a factor of 0.65 (Power 2020). This is an important number and we do robust-
ness check with a factor of 0.75, based on The Renault Group (2020).
12  2021: 15,464 respondents, 2020: 14,170 respondents, 2019: 16,216 respondents.


===== [PAGE 14] =====

1796
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
unproblematic as long as this is not a systematic measurement error. Further, we don’t 
know whether a transaction has actually taken place, but for most it probably has. Except 
for rather unlikely events, e.g., seller changes their mind and suddenly wanting to keep the 
car, a transaction is by far the most likely reason for the ad being removed.
Each ad is one observation each month. The average time to sell a car on finn.no is less 
than a month (The Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association 2021a). We remove duplicate 
data entries based on a combination of the chassis number, dealer type, effect, engine vol-
ume, fuel, main color, make, model, municipality of the seller, transmission wheel drive, 
year model, the year the vehicle is first registered and number of seats. If the same car is 
advertized with 3 months or less interval, it is defined as a duplicate. This means that if the 
same car is advertized two months in a row, only one of the ads is part of the analysis. We 
use the ad that is newest in the analysis, because the price of the newest ad is probably the 
closest to the deal price.
If the car is advertised with the same price more than three times, even if it is advertized 
with some time interval it is likely that the car is not sold at all. Therefore, observations 
that are duplicates and the price is the same for three ads are taken out of the analysis. Note 
that we have already taken out the observation of the analysis if a car is advertized with 
less than 3 months in between each ad, no matter if the price is the same or not.
Most cars come in different trims, which are different versions for each models with 
different equipment level. We do not have consistent data on trim levels of the model that 
is advertised. As the price of the new vehicle can vary a lot depending on trim, but also 
e.g. battery capacity, engine size and body style, the price of the new vehicle can have a 
large interval. We take this into account in one empirical specification by removing models 
where the relative difference between the maximum and the minimum price of one model 
exceeds 1.5. This does not change the result much.
4.2  Descriptive Statistics
In the analysis we compare electric vehicles and gasoline vehicles. Cars of both fuel types 
are maximum 10 years old. There are roughly 367,000 gasoline vehicles and 179,000 
electric vehicles in the sample, which means that the share of electric vehicles in the sam-
ple is around 1/3 and gasoline vehicles around 2/3 (see Table 1). Among the gasoline 
vehicles, about 2/3 are small and 1/3 is large, while for electric vehicles there are fewer 
large vehicles available (11% of the sample), which is natural when we recall that the 
supply of large electric vehicles has been limited up until recently.13 In 2011 there are 
32 times more gasoline vehicles as electric vehicles. By 2016, this number is reduced 
to 4, while there are more electric vehicles than gasoline vehicles sold used in 2021 (see 
Table 7 in Appendix C).
Electric vehicles in the sample are younger than the gasoline vehicles. Average age is 
2.7 for electric vehicles, while for gasoline vehicles the average age is 3.5, see more details 
in Table 8. The number of secondhand vehicles that are from 2011 or later that are adver-
tised on finn.no every year can be seen in Table 7 in the Appendix. 56% of the electric 
vehicle sample has range below 200 km and only 16% 400 km or above (Table 2). The 
13  Small cars are defined as sedan, hatchback, coupe and cabriolet, while large cars are defined as station 
wagon, SUV, pickup and multipurpose vehicles. We have done this categorization.


===== [PAGE 15] =====

1797
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
mean driving range each year is lower for the used vehicles than the new vehicles, which 
underlines the fast technological development, see Appendix Table 9.
The market for gasoline vehicles are more varied than the market for electric vehicles, 
which is natural when we recall that there are fewer electric models available than gasoline 
models. The secondhand electric vehicle market is dominated by Nissan Leaf with about 
1/5 of the market. In Appendix Table 11 we see the top ten models in the secondhand mar-
ket for electric and gasoline vehicles.
4.3  Empirical Strategy
A car i is sold new (time t = 0 ) at price Pi0 which we treat as exogenous. We assume that 
the resale value follows a process so that at time t it is
where Ai is a car specific characteristic to be detailed below. We assume that secondhand 
vehicle prices decay exponentially with an annual rate 1 −Bi . The parameter 휇 is the pass-
through of the new price, and 휖it is the stochastic error term.
In order to find the annual percentage drop in prices, we take the logarithm of equa-
tion (10) which leads us to the following equation where lower case letters denote logs of 
variables:
(10)
Pit = AiBt
iP휇
i0e휖it,
(11)
pit = ai + 훽it + 휇pi0 + 휖it
Table 1   Number of vehicles 
based on size
Small: Sedan, coupe, cabriolet and hatchback
Large: SUV, station wagon, multipurpose vehicle and pickup
Gasoline
Electric
Gasoline (%)
Electric (%)
Total
366 586
178 866
67
33
Small
249 307
155 278
68
87
Large
112 077
20 131
31
11
Not categorized 
into size 
classes
5202
3457
1
2
Table 2   The electric vehicle 
sample
Number
Share 
(%)
Mean age
Range below 200 km
100 124
56.0
3.36
Range [200–300 km)
18 989
10.6
1.45
Range [300–400 km)
30 618
17.1
2.32
Range [400–500 km)
18 231
10.2
1.09
Range equal to or over 500 km
10 369
5.8
1.64
Range missing
535
0.3
3.65


===== [PAGE 16] =====

1798
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
The key parameter of interest is 훽i , the annual percentage decline in prices.14 As we only 
observe each vehicle at one point in time (when it is sold in the secondhand market), the 
specific 훽i for each car is not observable. Instead we exploit that vehicles are sold at differ-
ent ages in the secondhand market and estimate a fuel-specific 훽f . The rate is potentially 
specific within other categories than the fuel, such as the make, the driving range of the 
electric car, the price category of the new vehicle, the size and the vintage.
The variable ai measures the technological level of cars of make i. Technological 
level and technological progress are difficult to measure directly. Rather we include 
a composite measure of several characteristics, including range for electric vehicles, 
mileage, make reputation, fuel and size. First, by including a fuel specific coefficient 
( 훾f ) on log mileage, mit , at the time the vehicle is sold in the secondhand market. Sec-
ond, we add fixed effects for make ( 휃m ), size (measured by body style or weight, 휁s ) 
and fuel times year ( 훼t×f).15 As the market for electric vehicles are changing each year, 
it makes sense to have a different control for each fuel each year. For instance is the 
supply of fast charging stations increasing each year and we control for that with fuel 
times year fixed effects.
We also control for type of dealer by adding dealer fixed effects ( 휔d ). There are three dif-
ferent dealer categories: private seller, professional importer of that specific brand and pro-
fessional car sellers, and there might be selection into what cars are sold from which type of 
seller.16 Cars that are similar in age, fuel, make, model and mileage, but are sold by different 
types of dealers, might be different and we control for this. There is a statistically significant 
difference between the price fall of the different sellers, as shown in Table 22 in Appendix D, 
so we believe it is useful to control for the dealer type.
A vehicle i of make m with fuel type f and size category s sold in year t from a dealer of 
type d that was new in year n gets a price
The standard errors are clustered on the make (m).
We assume a linear annual percentage fall in prices in the main specification, but we also 
investigate the price fall with a squared age term. In addition we investigate the secondhand 
prices non-parametrically in Fig. 10.
If price at time n, pi,n , is unknown for some reason, we introduce a dummy for missing 
variables. This implies simply following the price path downward without information of the 
initial price. We check whether the results are the same without the dummies (and therefore 
without the observations without new vehicle price) in Table 26.
We could also use the price on the same car model as new at the same time as when the 
used car is sold, rather than when the used car was new. However, the correlation coefficient 
between the price when the car was new and the price of the new car when the car was sold is 
above 0.9. Therefore we use the price when the used car is new.
(12)
pi,t = 훽f t + 훼t×f + 휃m + 휁s + 휔d + 휇pi,n + 훾f mi,t + 휖i,t
14  As long as 훽i is small, we have 훽i ≈ln(1 + 훽i) or 훽i = ln(Bi) ≈Bi −1.
15  One challenge is that some car makes only make gasoline cars and some only make electric cars. How-
ever, as make fixed effects are additive and the price decline 훽f is not make×fuel specific, this does not pose 
a threat to identification.
16  The share of vehicles based on seller can be seen in Appendix Table 10.


===== [PAGE 17] =====

1799
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
5  Results
In this section we first estimate the effect age has on secondhand prices, both year-by-
year price decline and average annual decline. Then we look at range on electric vehicles 
interacted with age. These are our main findings. In addition we have estimated quantiles 
instead of the mean for used vehicle prices. Further we have investigated different size cat-
egories, new vehicle price percentiles and vintage effects. We also compare electric vehi-
cles with diesel and other fuels, before we turn to other factors affecting the price path. At 
the end of the chapter we discuss robustness.
5.1  The Price Fall of Electric Vehicles Compared to Gasoline Vehicles
In Fig. 5 we show the results from a regression with age dummies interacted with the fuel 
type. We control for mileage interacted with fuel, new vehicle price, a dummy on those 
with missing on mileage and new vehicle price, year × fuel fixed effects and dealer fixed 
effects. We see that the overall picture is that while the price of secondhand gasoline cars 
drops by about 60% after 10 years, the price fall for electric cars is even stronger at about 
85%.
In Table 3, we show that this holds across a range of specifications. Here, different ver-
sions of regression equation (12) are shown. Gasoline vehicles is the baseline, and we 
see that the annual price drop for gasoline vehicles is approximately 10–11%. The price 
on electric vehicles fall between 4.7 and 6.4 p.p. more than gasoline vehicles, which is 
16–17% annually. The difference between gasoline and electric vehicles is statistically 
Fig. 5   The price path for gasoline and electric vehicles. The grey areas are 95% confidence intervals. The 
standard errors are clustered on make. There are 62 clusters. The regression includes year times fuel fixed 
effects and dealer fixed effects, and we control for mileage, vehicle price when new and whether the new 
vehicle price or mileage is missing


===== [PAGE 18] =====

1800
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
significantly at least on a 5% level in all specifications, giving a clear indication that elec-
tric cars fall more quickly in price than gasoline cars.
In column (1) we control for year × fuel fixed effects, which absorb influences of all 
omitted variables that differ from one year to the next for each fuel type but are constant 
over all vehicles of the same fuel type in each year. This can for instance be development of 
fast charging stations or other year specific events for electric vehicles or for gasoline vehi-
cles. In addition, we control for dealer fixed effects in all specifications, except in column 
(5), where we show the results without dealer fixed effects.
In column (2) we add body style fixed effects to year × fuel fixed effects.17 The 
difference between gasoline and electric vehicles does not change much compared to 
column (1).
In column (3) we add make fixed effects to the year × fuel fixed effects. The dummy 
variables for the makes absorb the influences of all omitted variables that differ from make 
to make, but are constant over time. The difference between gasoline and electric vehicles 
reduces by 1.3  percentage points compared to column (1), indicating that the price fall var-
ies between different makes and when only looking at the price fall within each make, the 
price fall on electric vehicles is lower (but slightly higher for gasoline vehicles). However, 
the difference in price fall between electric and gasoline vehicles is still statistical signifi-
cant. We investigate the price fall for specific makes further in Appendix Fig. 14 and in 
Appendix Sect. D.1.
In column (4), we take out the models that have a large variation in new vehicle prices 
between the different variants of the model. This reduces the sample from around 550,000 
to around 340,000. It could be that the models that vary a lot in prices as new also have 
other characteristics that influence the price decline, so this is not our main specification, 
but a robustness test. We see that the coefficients do not change a lot and that the difference 
is still statistically significant.
In column (5), we show the results without controlling for dealer fixed effects. The dif-
ference between electric and gasoline vehicles stay in the same magnitude and remain sta-
tistically significant.
We see that mileage is not an important factor for the price of used gasoline vehicles, 
and even less important for electric vehicles, when age is taken into account. Each percent-
age increase in mileage is associated with a price fall of around 0.07% for gasoline vehi-
cles. This might be due to age and mileage being closely correlated (see Appendix Fig. 9). 
For electric vehicles mileage is not statistically significant in any of the specifications in 
Table 3, but in other specifications shown in the Appendix.18 However, the magnitude of 
the effect is small.
Finally, the price decline appears to increase over time. The price fall curve depicted 
in Fig.  5 seems to be concave and in Table  12 in Appendix D we investigate whether 
the concavity is statistically significant by adding an age squared term. The concavity is 
18  Specifically this is Table  12 where age is squared, Table  13 without the electric vehicles with range 
below 200 km, Table 14 with quantile regression, Table 16 where we investigate vintage effects, Table 17 in 
the highest price category, Table 18 when we only look at those cars that are new in 2017–2021, Table 19 
when we only look at those cars sold in 2018–2021, Table 20 when we look at the cars aged 0–3 years and 
Table 23 where we control for the new vehicle price the year the vehicle was sold, not the year the vehicle 
was new.
17  There are eight different body style categories: sedan, hatchback, coupe, cabriolet, station wagon, SUV, 
pickup and multipurpose vehicles, defined by The Norwegian Road Federation (OFV), see Appendix B.2.3.


===== [PAGE 19] =====

1801
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
statistically significant for both technologies, and electric vehicles are statistically signifi-
cant more concave than gasoline vehicles.
5.2  Range and Age
One factor that has increased significantly over the 10 years we look into, is driving range. 
Range can be seen as a proxy for technological development. We investigate whether the 
price decline is different for different ranges. Figure 6 shows a version of Eq. (12) where 
the coefficient on age is modelled as a fourth grade polynomial interacted with range. The 
figure shows clearly that it is vehicles with range below 200 km that have the largest price 
decline. The secondhand prices on vehicles with range over approximately 200 km decline 
at the same level as gasoline vehicles (around 10% annually, see Table 3). However, over 
half of the electric vehicle sample is vehicles with range below 200 km. The vehicles with 
range from 200 km and upwards have mean age of 1.74 years, median of 1 year and the 
highest age is 8 years. We therefore do not have a sample where those with the longer range 
than 200 km have been in the car market for many years. This is therefore an important 
question for further investigation when the electric vehicle market has developed further.
In Fig. 7 we see that when we take out the electric vehicles with range below 200 km 
of the analysis, the difference in price decline between gasoline and electric vehicles is 
no longer present. In Appendix Table 13 we have the same sample, and the electric vehi-
cles actually decline less in price than gasoline vehicles. However, the comparison between 
electric and gasoline vehicles might not be of same-sized cars, as electric vehicles with 
range below 200 km are small cars, while for gasoline vehicles the sample is all sizes.
5.3  Additional Findings
Our main study is on the marginal effect of age on prices by fuel type. It is also interesting 
to look at the whole distribution of prices conditional on age. To do so, we show condi-
tional quantile regression on the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 90th percentile in Appendix 
Table 14. The estimates show that the distribution of prices for gasoline cars conditional 
on age shifts downward with age. But as the coefficients at all percentiles are fairly sim-
ilar, it seems the distribution of prices remain similar. For electric cars, the conditional 
distribution shifts downward and more strongly than for gasoline cars. Moreover, we see 
that the coefficients on age are numerically larger for the lower percentiles than the higher 
percentiles. This indicates that the distribution of prices is widening in age. As each of 
the reported estimates have non-overlapping confidence intervals at conventional levels of 
confidence, we can also reject statistically that the distribution remains unchanged. Notice 
that price and range are also highly correlated, but as gasoline cars don’t have a meaningful 
range this is not included in these regressions.
We compare different size categories based on either body style or weight in Appendix 
Table 15. Large electric vehicles do not have a statistically significant larger price fall than 
gasoline vehicles. Depending on how size is defined, it might seem that large electric vehi-
cles have a smaller price decline than large gasoline vehicles. However, this is uncertain as 
an electric vehicle with the same size as a gasoline vehicle weigh more due to the batteries, 
but it is uncertain exactly how much more.
We investigate whether there are vintage effects. With vintage effects we mean that 
there are different price decline pattern for the vehicles that are new in the first part of the 


===== [PAGE 20] =====

1802
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Table 3   Comparing gasoline and electric vehicles
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses. There are 62 clusters in all but specification (4), where there are 44 clusters.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age
− 0.105***
− 0.103***
− 0.109***
− 0.112***
− 0.111***
(0.00462)
(0.00433)
(0.00404)
(0.00546)
(0.00444)
Electric × Age
− 0.0638***
− 0.0632***
− 0.0468**
− 0.0567***
− 0.0584***
(0.0188)
(0.0193)
(0.0198)
(0.0171)
(0.0194)
Ln new price
1.068***
1.046***
0.998***
1.088***
1.062***
(0.0242)
(0.0302)
(0.0305)
(0.0290)
(0.0238)
Ln mileage × Gasoline
− 0.0770***
− 0.0776***
− 0.0757***
− 0.0608***
− 0.0775***
(0.00773)
(0.00657)
(0.00761)
(0.00542)
(0.00772)
Ln mileage × Electric
0.0170
0.0190
− 0.00448
0.0123
0.00939
(0.0121)
(0.0124)
(0.00855)
(0.0145)
(0.0120)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Body style fixed effects
N
Y
N
N
N
Make fixed effects
N
N
Y
N
N
Taken out those with large variation in new vehicle price 
and those without new vehicle price
N
N
N
Y
N
Observations
545,452
545,452
545,452
336,220
545,452
R2
0.859
0.861
0.879
0.902
0.857


===== [PAGE 21] =====

1803
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
period (2011–2015) than the vehicles that are new in the second part (2016–2021). The 
results are shown in Table 16. The price decline of electric vehicles compared to gasoline 
vehicles in the first period is around 1 percentage point higher than in the second period 
(column 1), and within each make the difference between vintages is 1.5 percentage points.
We split the sample into different subgroups in order to investigate whether and how 
the price decline difference between the two technologies are present in different sub-
groups. We compare vehicles in different price categories when they were new in Appen-
dix Table 17.19 For the vehicles that are priced when new equal to or above the median 
or equal to or above the 75th percentile the electric vehicles decline less in price than the 
gasoline vehicles. For vehicles that are below the median in new vehicle price the electric 
vehicles decline more than gasoline vehicles. This can be due to range, but also other fac-
tors. We see in Table 9 that there is a large difference in range for the cars that are above 
and below the median.
We also group the sample into different time periods based on when they were new 
(Appendix Table 18), when they were sold (Appendix Table 19) and different age groups 
(Appendix Table 20). The difference in price fall between gasoline and electric vehicles is 
Fig. 6   The price decline for electric cars with different driving range. This is the regression in Eq. (12) 
with a fourth grade polynomial of range interacted with age. Range is WLTP standard. If NEDC is the only 
available range, we reduce the range by a factor of 0.65 (Power 2020). The grey areas are 95% confidence 
intervals. We start the graph where the sample range start: 76 km range. There are 28 observations with 
663 km range. The rest of the sample has a maximum of 564 km. Therefore the graph ends at 564 km. We 
do a robustness check for the factor converting between NEDC and WLTP and increase it to 0.75. This can 
be seen in Figure 11
19  We have calculated the statistics for new vehicle price weighted by the vehicles of all fuel types that are 
advertized on finn.no. The statistics is not differentiated by fuel.


===== [PAGE 22] =====

1804
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
statistically significant for all subgroups, except for those new in 2014–2016 and those sold in 
2018–2021.
5.4  Diesel and Other Fuels
We compare electric vehicles with gasoline vehicles which is a mature technology. Diesel 
vehicles could also be included in the analysis, but the price path of diesel vehicles will not 
just represent vehicle technology that are mature, but a vehicle technology that policymakers 
want to phase out, to a larger degree than gasoline vehicles. Diesel cars had a large advantage 
from the Norwegian car tax system in 2007 to 2011, and the diesel share of the new car mar-
ket was above 70% during this period. From 2012 the car tax system was changed in order to 
reduce the diesel share. Because other things than being a mature technology is important for 
the price path of diesel vehicles, they are not in the main analysis.
We present the results for diesel vehicles and the other fuels in Table 21 in Appendix D. 
This shows that electric vehicles fall more in price than all other fuel types, including diesel 
vehicles. However, the difference in price drop between diesel and electric vehicles is only 
statistically significant in some specifications.
Fig. 7   The price path for electric vehicles with range from 200 km and upwards and gasoline vehicles. The 
range is measured with WLTP standard. If NEDC is the only available range, we reduce the range by a fac-
tor of 0.65 (Power 2020). The grey areas are 95% confidence intervals. The standard errors are clustered on 
make. There are 59 clusters. The curve for electric vehicles stop at 8 years because there are no older elec-
tric vehicles with range from 200 km and more. The regression includes year times fuel fixed effects and 
dealer fixed effects, and we control for mileage, vehicle price when new and whether the new vehicle price 
or mileage is missing


===== [PAGE 23] =====

1805
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
5.5  Other Factors Affecting the Price Path
5.5.1  Battery Degradation
Degraded batteries or a worry of degraded batteries may be a reason for the price fall on 
electric vehicles. Degradation of batteries was a concern when the modern electric vehi-
cles market had just started, but anecdotal evidence in the media and correspondence with 
experts in the sector point in the direction that rapid degradation, rendering batteries use-
less, is not a large problem (Kelleher Environmental 2019).20 However, this is a question 
that warrants further investigation.
The warranty that are given by the car manufacturers can give some indication of the 
life length of batteries. Nissan has a warranty of 8 years for the vehicles sold in 2016 
and onward,21 guaranteeing the batteries are 75% of its original state. From 2014 Tesla 
has a warranty that the battery maintain 70% of its original state for 8 years or a kilo-
meter stand of 160,000–240,000 km depending on the model. Hyundai Ioniq guarantees 
8 years/200,000  km. This indicates that the car sellers are confident about the battery 
lifetime.
Even though the batteries last long, a 25–30% degradation of the batteries might be 
enough to reduce the price of the vehicle, especially if the range is already quite low. 
Whether this is the case cannot be found with the data from finn.no. To investigate the bat-
tery question further, we have looked into a survey among Norwegian electric vehicle own-
ers conducted by the Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association.22 For the years 2019–2021 
they were asked whether the battery capacity in their car has become considerably lower 
since it was new.23 Notice that the survey does not provide a clear definition of the term 
“considerably lower”. Still it gives an indication of the state of the battery. Respondents 
answer on a 1–5 Likert scale range, and the higher the score the better experience do the 
consumer have with the battery.
In Fig. 8 we see the share of respondents who experience that the battery capacity is 
considerably lower since the car was new (answering 1 or 2 on the survey question). When 
the car is between 0 and 3 years the share is around or below 10%. Between 4 and 6 years 
the share is lower than 30%. Between 7 and 8 years-old the share is between 20 and 45%. 
The 9 year-olds have shares between 50 and 60% and 10 year-olds down to 37%. However, 
the sample size is low for the 9 and 10 year-olds (below 100 for each year).
The mean score for 5 year-old electric vehicles is 3.4 in 2021, 3.5 in 2020 and 3.8 in 
2019, which means that the mean score has gone down from 2019 to 2021. This can be 
seen in Fig. 13 in Appendix D. The mean score for 8 year-old electric vehicles is 3.3 in 
2021 and 2.9 in 2019 and 2020, which means that the mean score has gone up from 2019 
to 2021. For nine year old cars the score is lower with 2.5 in 2021 and 2.8 in 2020, but 
again: the sample size is low.
20  Email correspondence with researchers at NTNU and SINTEF and phone conversation with a represent-
ative from a car recycle company (Bilgjenvinning AS), which has 45% of the car recycling market.
21  5 years for the Leafs between 2011 and 2015.
22  We have not looked into whether those that answer the survey are representative of electric vehicle own-
ers in Norway.
23  They were also asked the question in 2018, but in that round of the survey they don’t report the year the 
car was new so we do not know the age of the car.


===== [PAGE 24] =====

1806
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
From this information we cannot exclude the possibility that some of the price fall for 
electric vehicles is due to some degradation of the batteries, but the information does not 
indicate that degradation of the batteries drives the whole price fall on electric vehicles. 
However, we can not be conclusive on this matter. Another important point is that cars with 
short range has to be charged more often than cars with longer range. Therefore, as charg-
ing reduces the quality of the battery, the cars with short range might have more degraded 
batteries and as the battery technology improves, battery degradation might also reduce.
5.5.2  Maintenance Cost
Gasoline vehicles typically have higher maintenance cost when they are older. Besides the 
battery degradation, this is not the case for electric vehicles, though.24 Therefore, without 
technological change and battery degradation, electric vehicles should have a higher price 
on the secondhand car than gasoline vehicles if the two technologies are otherwise equal.
5.5.3  Supply Side Constraints
There have been—and still are—supply side constrains on electric vehicles, both that the 
models that fit the preferences of different consumers are not available and that there are 
waiting lists on popular electric vehicles. The number of individuals on the waiting list that 
actually end up buying the car when given the possibility is not public information. The 
waiting lists might also be part of a marketing strategy, as simply raising the price on the 
car would seem to be a more straightforward approach. We don’t know if and how the sup-
ply side constrains affect the secondhand car market, but we can assume that it had a posi-
tive effect on the price in the secondhand electric car market. Hyundai Kona, for instance, 
has been advertised with higher price on finn.no than the price on the new vehicle, but we 
do not know whether the vehicle is sold for this price. If waiting lists have influenced the 
used car market, the effect is probably that the price fall on electric vehicles is lower than 
without the waiting lists. This means that without supply side constraints the price fall on 
electric vehicles would probably be higher, especially on large electric vehicles.
5.6  Robustness
We check whether the main results hold under other specifications than in Table 3. The 
difference in price fall between gasoline and electric vehicles is statistically significant in 
all robustness checks, except with absolute values instead of log values when we include 
make fixed effects. We use all variables available, such as transmission, wheel drive and 
main color. In addition, instead of using the price when the vehicle was new as control, we 
use the new car price the year the vehicle was sold used. Especially for electric vehicles the 
price of new vehicles might change in a non-linear way because of new models entering 
the market and reducing prices on existing models (The Norwegian Electric Vehicle Asso-
ciation 2021b). The price fall difference when we do not control for dealer fixed effects 
and at the same time control for new vehicle price when the vehicle was sold is very high 
(Table 23, column 5), indicating that the private sale of electric vehicles and gasoline vehi-
cles is different. We also test whether the main results hold when we drop the observations 
that are 0 years old when they are sold on finn.no. We also take out the dummies on those 
24  See for instance Green Cars (2021).


===== [PAGE 25] =====

1807
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
that miss the control variables new vehicle price and mileage (which result in a smaller 
sample). In addition we do the regression with absolute values, instead of log values. We 
also show the results when clustering the standard errors differently, both with make × 
fuel and make × the year the vehicle is new. The standard errors are as expected some-
what smaller with more clusters, but the statistical significance stay at the same level. The 
robustness checks are reassuring for the main result. See more details in Appendix E.
6  Conclusion
In this article we have investigated whether the price of electric vehicles decline faster than 
the price of gasoline vehicles. We have found empirical evidence that they do, but only 
those with range below 200 km. Our hypothesis is that the faster price fall on electric vehi-
cles compared to gasoline vehicles is mostly due to faster technological development. As 
the adoption of electric vehicles is increasing, this is relevant information for more con-
sumers in more markets. The valuation of electric vehicles that are ten years or younger 
in 2021 is a snapshot that might change as the improvements of the technology of electric 
vehicles flattens out. Comparing the results of this analysis with an analysis that is done 
2–10 years later will be interesting. It will especially be interesting to see how the price 
path of the electric vehicles with longer range than 200 km develops. As the electric vehi-
cles with range from 200 km and upwards is still young, we need to wait some more years 
to get the full picture of the price path of electric vehicles with longer range. In addition, it 
would be interesting to investigate which factors influence the vehicle price and the price 
fall, for instance using causal forest approaches. Further, the price path of other technolo-
gies with rapid improvements would be interesting to investigate, for instance solar power 
and smart mobile phones.
Our findings do not directly answer whether buying an electric vehicle is an economic sen-
sible choice. Even if electric vehicles with less range than 200 km have fallen more in price 
the last decade than gasoline vehicles, there are other factors than value loss that influence the 
Fig. 8   Reported battery degradation by vehicle age. The figure shows the fraction of respondents who 
report that they experience that the battery has degraded (score 1 or 2 out of 5) since the car was new


===== [PAGE 26] =====

1808
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
total cost of ownership of a vehicle. Electric vehicles have lower maintenance cost and lower 
fuel cost compared to vehicles with internal combustion engine. The batteries can be reused 
for other purposes and the car can be recycled (Kelleher Environmental 2019). In addition, 
electric vehicles are subsidized in many countries, making new technology cheaper for con-
sumers (IEA 2021).
The maturity of a technology might depend on the adoption rates in combination with other 
factors (Pathak et al. 2022, p. TS-128-129). Therefore the findings of our paper should not be 
used as an argument for delaying the deployment of new low-carbon technologies. Rather, the 
findings may be used to inform about the cost of implementing climate policies. The value 
of the secondhand products matters for the total cost of ownership of the good, which again 
matters for the cost of climate policy. The Norwegian government, for instance, has a goal that 
“the purchase of zero-emission cars should be more economically favourable than the pur-
chase of conventional cars” (Meld. St. 33:2016–2017). When comparing whether it is favour-
able to buy an electric vehicle compared to a gasoline vehicle, it is important to take into 
account also the difference in the value of the used car, not just the price of the new car. This 
point can be transferred to other low-carbon technologies with fast technological progress. At 
the same time, many actors are working on finding new business models for batteries that are 
no longer in use in a car (see for instance Evyon 2022). This indicates that even if products 
with fast technological development deteriorates faster, they are not without value.
Appendix
The Effect of Technological Progress
Opting Out of Car Ownership
In the main analysis we assume that all consumers need a car, hence implicitly that the utility 
of not owning a car is sufficiently low. In many settings, other means of transportation can be a 
suitable alternative. To include this in the model, we can introduce an outside opportunity of 
not owning a car yielding a utility level U . This alternative is most relevant for consumers 
with a low car preference parameter h. Hence this alternative is chosen for consumers with 
UO < U . This yields a new cut-off level h
∼ defined by
As the number in the N and O groups still have to be equally sized in equilibrium, this 
yields a new equilibrium condition
This change to the model does not change any qualitative insights from the model, so to 
maintain simplicity we disregard the presence of an outside opportunity for the rest of the 
paper.
xu h
∼−pu + 훽(xu h
∼−pu) = U ⇒h
∼=
U
(1 + 훽)xu
+ pu
xu
F
(pn −(1 + 훽)pu
(1 −휇)xn
)
−F
(
U
(1 + 훽)xu
+ pu
xu
)
= 1 −F
( pn −pu
(1 −휇)xn
)


===== [PAGE 27] =====

1809
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Proof of Theoretical Results
To see the effect of technological progress on the market, we can differentiate equation (8) 
to get
where the left hand side are the demand effects and the right hand side the supply effects. 
Solving, we find
Moreover, we have
Using equation (8), we find
As (1 + 𝛽)𝛾̄h > 𝜇
𝛾h , we then get d̄h
d𝛾< 0.
Data
In this Appendix, we present details of the data we use in our analysis.
Variables from finn.no
The data from finn.no forms the basis of our analysis. It includes a hashed vehicle id num-
ber, chassis number, the listed secondhand price of the vehicle the seller wants, the year the 
vehicle is first registered, year model, fuel type, mileage, make and model, number of seats, 
(13)
f(h)
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
−
1 + 𝛽

1 −𝜇
𝛾

xn
dp1 −
[pn −(1 + 𝛽)pu] 𝜇xn
(𝛾)2

1 −𝜇
𝛾

xn
2
d𝛾
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
= −f(̄h)

−
1
(𝛾−𝜇)xn
dp1 −(pn −pu)xn
(𝛾−𝜇)xn
2 d𝛾

(14)
dp1
d𝛾= −x0
f(h)h
𝜇
(1+𝛾)2
1−𝜇
𝛾
+ f(̄h)̄h
1
(𝛾−𝜇)
f(h) 1+𝛽
1−𝜇
𝛾
+ f(̄h)
1
𝛾−𝜇
(15)
= −x0
f(h)h 𝜇
𝛾+ f(̄h)̄h
f(h)(1 + 𝛽)(𝛾) + f(̄h)
< 0
d̄h
d𝛾= −(pn −pu)xn
(𝛾−𝜇)2x2
n
−
1
(𝛾−𝜇)xn
dpu
d𝛾
d̄h
d𝛾= −
1
(𝛾−𝜇)
(
̄h −
f(h)h 𝜇
𝛾+ f(̄h)̄h
f(h)(1 + 𝛽)𝛾+ f(̄h)
)
= −
f(h)
(𝛾−𝜇) ×
(1 + 𝛽)𝛾̄h −𝜇
𝛾h
f(h)(1 + 𝛽)𝛾+ f(̄h)


===== [PAGE 28] =====

1810
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
municipality of the seller, dealer type, engine effect, engine volume, transmission, wheel 
drive, main color, as well as the month and year of an ad on finn.no.
We will now go through the variables that we use in the analysis.
Vehicle Id Number
Each vehicle has an id number which is unique and encrypted to keep the data anonymous. 
We combine this variable with the chassis number, dealer type, effect, engine volume, fuel, 
main color, make, model, municipality of the seller, transmission wheel drive, year model, 
the year the vehicle is first registered and number of seats to check whether a vehicle has 
been advertised for more than a month (and therefore becomes a duplicate observation) 
and to a lower price.
Vehicle Age
To find the age of a vehicle, we can use two variables to tell us the year the vehicle was 
new: The year model and the year the vehicle was first registered. The year model in itself 
is an imprecise term. Some manufacturers start selling year model t early in year t −1 , and 
some maintain the year on the model until they change the model.
However, year of first registration can also be wrong. Although our data ends in 2021, 
there are observations with year of first registration date after 2021. There are also numer-
ous observations with year of first registration before 1940. Although some of these may be 
antique cars, some are clear mistakes. There are for instance multiple Nissan Leaf presum-
ably registered before 1940, which is unreasonable as the model entered the market after 
2010.
Our solution is to use the lowest of the year of first registration and the model year 
whenever both are present. Moreover, we assume that vehicles first registered before 1940 
is a mistake, and in this case we use the year model unless the year of first registration and 
year model is the same year, we keep the year of first registration.
As we have data on the year the vehicle is advertised on finn.no, we find the age of the 
vehicle by subtracting the year the vehicle is advertised with the year the vehicle is new.
Fuel Type
The data from finn.no has data on fuel type. However, there may be mistakes by the seller, 
for instance claiming that a vehicle is a gasoline vehicle when it is a hybrid gasoline vehi-
cle or stating that it is an electric vehicle when it is a hybrid or plug-in hybrid. When there 
is only one observation of a vehicle model one year that is electric, the electric model is not 
listed by OFV, and we do not recognize the model name as an electric vehicle (there are 
so few electric vehicle models that it is possible to know most of them), we take them out 
of the analysis, because it is likely that they are erroneously classified as electric vehicles. 
This is the case of 41 observations.
Gasoline vehicles that are not found on the OFV list are treated differently, see more 
elaboration on this in Sect. B.2.1.
The finn data do not distinguish between plug-in hybrid and hybrid. To distinguish 
between the two, we also use data from OFV. If a vehicle is listed as gasoline-hybrid in 
the finn data and plug-in gasoline hybrid or a gasoline vehicle in the OFV data, we code 
it as a plug-in gasoline hybrid. If a vehicle is listed as hybrid in the finn data and hybrid 


===== [PAGE 29] =====

1811
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
and plug-in hybrid in the OFV data, we do not change it. As most of our analyses compare 
electric and gasoline vehicles this coding scheme has a minor impact on our results. In 
Table 21, however, we compare all fuel types.
The Price of the Secondhand Vehicle
We only have the price the seller lists on the finn platform, not the price the vehicle is actu-
ally sold at. There can be cases where the buyer and the seller agree on a lower price than 
the listed one.
Moreover, the price is without re-registration fee which varies through the period of 
investigation and for different vehicles, depending on age and fuel.
Mileage
We use mileage as a control variable because this is a variable that probably affect the price 
of the vehicle. Finn has rounded the number to the nearest thousand in order to anonymize 
the data. Observations where mileage is missing are controlled for with a dummy variable. 
See Table 5 to see the number of missing on mileage.
Number of Seats
This variable is used to distinguish between passenger vehicles and utility vehicles with the 
same model name.
Municipality of the Seller
We use the municipality of the seller as one of the variables to detect duplicates.
Variables from OFV
The Norwegian Road Federation (OFV) data are merged into the finn data set by fuel, 
model, make and the year the vehicle is new. The variables from OFV that we use are the 
price on the new vehicle and body style category.
The data from OFV are combined with the data from finn.no matching on the following 
variables: make, model, fuel and the year the vehicle is new.
Price on the New Vehicle
Norwegian Road Federation (OFV) collects prices on new vehicles from all importers that 
are formally linked to the producer. The price list of June every year is used to find the 
price on the new vehicle. When not found in the June list, we use the November list or 
the December list. If not found on either June, November or December list, the vehicle is 
marked as missing price on the new vehicle (see below for more information on the reason 
for the vehicle missing on the price list). See Table 5 to see the number of missing on new 
vehicle price.


===== [PAGE 30] =====

1812
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
There are many different equipment levels within the same model and the information 
from finn.no does not tell us which equipment level each vehicle has. Some equipment lev-
els within a model are a lot more expensive than the others. Therefore, we take the median 
price of the make, model, fuel and year. For robustness check we take out those models 
where the ratio between the maximum price and the minimum price is above 1.5. This can 
be seen in Table 3, column 4.
Body style category should also be one of the variables that the median price is based 
on, but since finn.no do not have this variable, we can not merge on this variable. Some 
models are more than one type of category. For instance Ford Focus can be bought as 
a hatchback or station wagon. Mercedes-Benz A-class is either sedan or hatchback. Mer-
cedes-Benz C-class is either sedan or station wagon. Then the median price is the median 
of all the models in the two types of vehicles body style categories.
Notice that the new prices we use are listed new prices. Actual prices of new cars could 
be lower due to e.g. haggling, rebates or campaigns.
Those observations with make or model “others” or “N/A” and fuel “N/A” when the 
model can be both electric and conventional vehicle are not merged and therefore lack the 
price on the new vehicle.
Some observations on finn.no are not found on the OFV list of new vehicle prices. 
There are four main explanations: (1) privately imported new vehicles from the factory, 
i.e. not through the importer that is related to the producer, (2) models from earlier years, 
(3) import of used vehicles, and (4) mistakes in the OFV list or at finn.no, for instance the 
advertiser is not aware that the vehicle is a hybrid and list it as a gasoline vehicle.
An example of explanation (1) is Fiat 500 Plug-in Hybrid which was produced for 
the American market. Fiat decided not to sell these vehicles in Europe, but some were 
imported through channels that were not related to the producer’s importer network.
The price on the new vehicle in category (2) is difficult to know. We can find the price 
on the model in earlier years, but the price probably changes from year to year.
For category (1), the price on finn.no is strictly speaking the price of the new vehicle in 
the Norwegian market if the car is 0 years-old. All vehicles that are not part of the OFV list 
get a dummy and the dummy is controlled for in the regression in Table 3. We also have 
the same specifications as in Table 3 without a dummy on those missing new vehicle price 
and that can be seen in Table 26.
OFV Listed Fuel Type
In the beginning of the period of investigation there were some models that were flexible 
fuel vehicles (cars that are able to use both gasoline and ethanol). OFV have them on their 
list, but as the market for these vehicles never took off in Norway, finn.no do not distin-
guish between gasoline vehicles and flexible fuel vehicles. We define all flexible fuel vehi-
cles in OFV data as gasoline vehicles.
Size Categories
There is no clear definition of different size categories. The EU Commission lists differ-
ent segments in the car market, but also state that “the exact market definition was left 
open”(Commission of the European Communities 1999, p.2).


===== [PAGE 31] =====

1813
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
In the USA the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has different size classes based 
on body style combined with passenger and cargo volume (fueleconomy.gov; n.d.). In con-
trast, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) in the USA categorize 
by class and weight (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration; n.d.). A third option 
in the USA is by The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) and The Highway Loss 
Data Institute (HLDS) which both are organizations funded by auto insurers and insurance 
associations. They use a combination of weight and length times width (IIHS and HLDI 
2020).
Body style   Most models have different variants. Some models are in two different body 
style categories. For instance, Volkswagen Golf can be both a hatchback or a station wagon. 
However, for electric vehicles the different variants of a model are mostly in the same body 
style categories. For gasoline there are several models that can be both a hatchback and a 
station wagon. We categorize them based on which body style categories there are most 
model variants of.
We use the body style categories that The Norwegian Road Federation (OFV) catego-
rize different models into.25 We have translated their definition.
“Cabriolet are cars with roofs that can be opened or removed, either by folding it into 
the body style, or being completely removed. Roadsters should have body style category 
cabriolet.
Hatchbacks are cars with a large tailgate/rear door that include the rear window. The 
rear edge of the rear window ends where the body ends, without any horizontal surface/
trunk lid. The hedge on the hatchback may have different inclination. The trunk is rela-
tively small compared to the total volume of the car. The station wagon has larger volume, 
while the body shape may otherwise be quite similar.
Coupes are cars that have prioritized appearance at the expense of space and practi-
cal considerations. They are characterized by what most people will perceive as "elegant 
lines". Often, the coupes are lower with a flatter rear window than ordinary hatchbacks and 
sedans, which the space, especially from the front seats and backwards, suffers underneath. 
The tailgate is hinged under the rear window. Coupes can have 2 and 4 doors.
Pickups are cars with an open loading plane behind a cab. The cab can contain several 
rows of seats.
Sedan are cars with preferably 4 doors and separate trunk and marked trunk lid that are 
hinged under/behind the rear window.
Station wagon are cars with full height backwards to the tailgate. The tailgate can be 
somewhat sloping and the trunk is open towards the cabin. They are characterized by large 
trunk in relation to the total volume of the car.
Multipurpose car are cars that are designed for maximum interior space utilization and 
flexibility. The body style shape is similar to that of the station wagon or hatchback, but the 
multipurpose cars are usually higher than these, albeit with normal ground clearance. They 
have a minimum of 5 seats in addition to luggage space.”
25  Personal email communication with Kjell Magne Aalbergsjø¸ in OFV, 11.02.22.


===== [PAGE 32] =====

1814
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
SUV is not defined by OFV.
Weight  Weight can be used as a proxy for size. We take the median of the different trims of 
the same model. As electric vehicles are heavier than gasoline vehicles due to the batteries, 
we use the gasoline vehicles as the basis to find the cutoff between large and small vehicles. 
We use the 75th percentile of the weight for all gasoline vehicles in the sample as the cutoff. 
This is 1382.5 kg. How much more an electric vehicle weigh due to the batteries is difficult 
to know, but the tax authorities use 15% extra weight for plug-in hybrids from 1st of January 
Table 4   Observations not part of the analysis
Number of 
observa-
tions
Ads on finn.no 2011- June 20th 2021
5,546,617
Advertized more than one time with less than 3 months in between
1,187,042
Older than 2011
2,903,240
Price over 2 mill NOK
9330
Price under 10 000 NOK
1746
Age -1 or less
5732
Age missing
45
Advertised more than three times without changing the price
7494
Utility vehicles
2275
Missing information, such as model name
2231
Wrong fuel (see Sect. B.1.3 for explanation)
42
Think
116
Buddy
20
Hydrogen vehicles
80
Gas vehicles
171
Total number of observations (all fuels, except hydrogen and gas)
1,427,053
Total number of observations, electric and gasoline
545,452
Table 5   Number of observations 
with some of the variables 
missing
Number of 
observa-
tions
Total
545,452
Missing new vehicle price
8659
Missing body style
8659
Missing mileage
21,400
Missing range (and electric vehicle)
535


===== [PAGE 33] =====

1815
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
2022 and before that they used 23% (The Norwegian Tax Administration; n.d.). We there-
fore add 10%, 20% and 30% to the electric vehicle weight when distinguishing between large 
and small vehicles based on weight in Table 15.
Variables from other Sources
Range
Range is taken from the webpage of the Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association (The Nor-
wegian Electric Vehicle Association 2022a). When the same model the same year has dif-
ferent range alternatives, we construct the median of the range. The range we use is the 
WLTP, which is the new standard. If the old standard, NEDC, is the only available, we 
reduce the driving range by a factor of 0.65 (Power 2020). Some models are for sale with 
different year models with different range at the same time and therefore we do not know 
for sure the range of the car the year the vehicle is new. We use the median range of the 
year model the year the vehicle is new.
Sample Selection
Vehicles that are new in 2011 or after is part of the analysis. We therefore do not include 
the observations for vehicles that are new earlier than 2011. See Tables 4 and 5  for an 
overview of the number of observations that are not part of the analysis.
In order to not let outliers influence the result, we analyze vehicles with a secondhand 
price range between 10 000 NOK and 2 million NOK, see Table 4 for the number of obser-
vations. In addition, we take out Think and Buddy cars as these can not be characterized 
as modern vehicles. Observations where the recorded vehicle age is negative at the time of 
transaction are also removed.
Descriptive Data
See Tables 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11, Fig. 9


===== [PAGE 34] =====

1816
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Table 6   Number of vehicles 
based on fuel
Number of vehicles
Share (%)
Gasoline vehicles
366,586
25.7
Electric vehicles
178,866
12.5
Hybrid vehicles
80,276
5.6
Plug-in hybrid vehicles
82,676
5.8
Diesel vehicles
718,649
50.4
Total
1,427,053
Table 7   Number of vehicles 
that are new in 2011 or later 
advertised each year
Year sold
Gasoline
Electric
Number of vehicles
2011
1752
55
2012
6316
217
2013
13,067
1068
2014
21,178
2241
2015
28,693
5040
2016
37,510
8979
2017
50,050
17,242
2018
54,201
30,077
2019
62,131
39,553
2020
61,338
43,300
2021
30,350
31,094
Table 8   Number of vehicles 
based on how old they are when 
they are for sale
Age
Number of vehicles
Electric
Gasoline
0
25,605
25,727
1
37,174
52,811
2
30,559
57,074
3
30,242
72,089
4
22,743
54,427
5
14,873
36,822
6
9401
26,582
7
4751
19,566
8
2313
12,783
9
929
6697
10
276
2008
Mean age
2.65
3.45
Mean age for vehicles that are 5 
years or younger
2.20
2.62


===== [PAGE 35] =====

1817
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Table 9   The mean range in the year the vehicles are new and sold in the secondhand market. The median 
refers to the price of the vehicle as new
We have calculated the statistics for new vehicle price weighted by the vehicles that are on finn.no.
The 50th percentile is 362,000 NOK.
In 2011 and 2012 there are no electric vehicles with price as new equal to or over the median.
Over median includes those equal to the median
Year
Mean range new
Mean range sold
Mean range sold over 
the median
Mean range 
sold below the 
median
2011
114
108
–
108
2012
122
115
–
115
2013
176
134
300
121
2014
169
161
300
124
2015
165
175
304
129
2016
199
175
323
133
2017
261
187
346
149
2018
289
201
383
173
2019
384
241
430
195
2020
396
275
484
211
2021
403
296
444
234
For all years
240
416
190
Table 10   Share of vehicles based 
on seller
Share of vehicles
Electric (%)
Gasoline (%)
Private seller
41.5
21.4
Professional seller of the same make
25.4
58.7
Other professional seller
33.1
19.9
Table 11   Top 10 secondhand models
Electric secondhand
Gasoline secondhand
Model
Share (%)
Model
Share (%)
1
Nissan Leaf (Hatchback)
23
VW Golf (Hatchback)
7
2
VW E-golf (Hatchback)
15
VW Polo (Hatchback)
3
3
Tesla Model S (Hatchback)
11
Ford Focus (Hatchback/Station wagon)
3
4
BMW i3 (Hatchback)
9
Ford Fiesta (Hatchback)
3
5
Kia E-soul (Hatchback)
6
Audi A3 (Hatchback)
3
6
VW E-up! (Hatchback)
4
Mercedes A-klasse (Hatchback/Sedan)
2
7
Tesla Model X (SUV)
3
Toyota Avensis (Sedan/Station wagon)
2
8
Renault Zoe (Hatchback)
3
Skoda Octavia (Station wagon)
2
9
Hyundai Ioniq (Hatchback)
3
Toyota Yaris (Hatchback)
2
10
Hyundai Kona (SUV)
2
Audi A1 (Hatchback)
2


===== [PAGE 36] =====

1818
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
More Detailed Results
The relationship between vehicle age and secondhand price is illustrated in Fig. 10. As 
expected, the price is declining in age. We also see that this decline is clearly stronger for 
electric vehicles than for gasoline cars (Tables 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21, 
Figs. 11, 12 and  13).
Fig. 9   Binned scatterplot of the relationship between mileage and age
Fig. 10   Secondhand vehicle prices by age and fuel type. Each point represent an equal number of observa-
tions. Results control for mileage, the log price of the new car and dummies for missing variables. The 
y-axis is on a logarithmic scale


===== [PAGE 37] =====

1819
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Table 12   Table 3 with age squared
Dependent variable is log of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses. There are 62 clusters in all but in (4) where there are 44 clusters.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age
− 0.0339***
− 0.0316***
− 0.0408***
− 0.0352***
− 0.0400***
(0.00673)
(0.00669)
(0.00659)
(0.00840)
(0.00650)
Age squared
− 0.00774***
− 0.00780***
− 0.00742***
− 0.00831***
− 0.00775***
(0.000537)
(0.000550)
(0.000544)
(0.000649)
(0.000559)
Electric × age
− 0.0240
− 0.0216
0.00289
0.00373
− 0.0126
(0.0221)
(0.0215)
(0.0170)
(0.0211)
(0.0220)
Electric × age squared
− 0.00587**
− 0.00610***
− 0.00706***
− 0.00839***
− 0.00666***
(0.00223)
(0.00222)
(0.00164)
(0.00177)
(0.00220)
Ln new price
1.080***
1.058***
1.013***
1.106***
1.074***
(0.0245)
(0.0300)
(0.0317)
(0.0309)
(0.0243)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.100***
− 0.102***
− 0.0983***
− 0.0869***
− 0.101***
(0.00700)
(0.00586)
(0.00683)
(0.00450)
(0.00698)
Ln mileage × electric
− 0.0201
− 0.0189
− 0.0443***
− 0.0340**
− 0.0292**
(0.0137)
(0.0138)
(0.00649)
(0.0135)
(0.0136)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Body style fixed effects
N
Y
N
N
N
Make fixed effects
N
N
Y
N
N
Taken out those with large variation in new 
vehicle price
and those without new vehicle price
N
N
N
Y
N
Observations
545,452
545,452
545,452
336,220
545,452
R2
0.865
0.866
0.884
0.911
0.862


===== [PAGE 38] =====

1820
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Table 13   Table 3 without the electric vehicles with range below 200 km
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses. There are 59 clusters in all but specification (4), where 
there are 44 clusters.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car 
price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age
− 0.105***
− 0.104***
− 0.107***
− 0.111***
− 0.112***
(0.00465)
(0.00436)
(0.00345)
(0.00551)
(0.00441)
Electric × age
0.0291***
0.0413***
0.0342***
0.0354***
0.0365***
(0.00756)
(0.00839)
(0.00585)
(0.00793)
(0.00765)
Ln new price
1.058***
1.009***
1.039***
1.087***
1.052***
(0.0209)
(0.0256)
(0.0238)
(0.0225)
(0.0219)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0741***
− 0.0743***
− 0.0753***
− 0.0606***
− 0.0748***
(0.00752)
(0.00603)
(0.00689)
(0.00541)
(0.00754)
Ln mileage × electric
− 0.0390***
− 0.0412***
− 0.0361***
− 0.0262***
− 0.0472***
(0.00987)
(0.0100)
(0.00773)
(0.00587)
(0.00906)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer category fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Body style category fixed effects
N
Y
N
N
N
Make fixed effects
N
N
Y
N
N
Taken out those with large vari-
ation in new vehicle price
and those without new vehicle 
price
N
N
N
Y
N
Observations
444,793
444,793
444,793
239,401
444,793
R2
0.871
0.875
0.884
0.918
0.868


===== [PAGE 39] =====

1821
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Table 14   Quantile regression
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors are robust, in parentheses.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing new vehicle price and mileage.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
10th percentile 25th percentile Median
75th percentile 90th percentile
Age
− 0.118***
− 0.111***
− 0.104***
− 0.0950***
− 0.0936***
(0.000456)
(0.000355)
(0.000297)
(0.000318)
(0.000428)
Electric × age
− 0.0760***
− 0.0634***
− 0.0433*** − 0.0262***
− 0.0163***
(0.000822)
(0.000634)
(0.000580)
(0.000517)
(0.000610)
Ln new price
1.018***
1.038***
1.065***
1.095***
1.116***
(0.00117)
(0.000945)
(0.000790)
(0.000805)
(0.00108)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0726***
− 0.0688***
− 0.0636*** − 0.0641***
− 0.0650***
(0.000823)
(0.000635)
(0.000520)
(0.000563)
(0.000850)
Ln mileage × electric
0.0205***
0.0130***
0.00260***
− 0.0100***
− 0.0214***
(0.00103)
(0.000785)
(0.000661)
(0.000674)
(0.000809)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer category fixed 
effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Observations
545,452
545,452
545,452
545,452
545,452


===== [PAGE 40] =====

1822
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Table 15   Different size categories based on either body style or weight
The cutoff between small and large vehicles based on weight is the 75th percentile for weight for gasoline 
vehicles. See Appendix B.2.3 for more information. Weight added means how much more weight is added 
to the electric vehicles to be in the same category as gasoline vehicles. Due to battery weight, electric vehi-
cles have added 20% to the cutoff in column 2, 10% added in column 3 and 30% added in column 4.
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses. There are 62 clusters.
Small gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/adver-
tised.
Large vehicles are defined as station wagon, SUV, pick-up and multi-purpose cars.
Small vehicles are sedan, hatchback, coupe and cabriolet.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing new vehicle price, body style and mileage.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Body style
Weight 20% added
Weight 10% added
Weight 30% added
Age
− 0.107***
− 0.111***
− 0.110***
− 0.111***
(0.00444)
(0.00422)
(0.00407)
(0.00422)
Electric × age
− 0.0578***
− 0.0568***
− 0.0592***
− 0.0572***
(0.0192)
(0.0170)
(0.0206)
(0.0168)
Large vehicles × age
0.00450
0.00890
0.00832
0.00889
(0.00381)
(0.00484)
(0.00493)
(0.00483)
Electric × large vehicles × age
0.0181
0.0525***
0.0127
0.0562***
(0.0168)
(0.0129)
(0.0231)
(0.0136)
Ln new price
1.065***
1.037***
1.061***
1.037***
(0.0252)
(0.0248)
(0.0227)
(0.0262)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0771***
− 0.0734***
− 0.0740***
− 0.0734***
(0.00669)
(0.00729)
(0.00725)
(0.00727)
Ln mileage × electric
0.00867
− 0.00483
0.00675
− 0.00458
(0.0108)
(0.00934)
(0.00956)
(0.0100)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Body style fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Observations
545,452
545,452
545,452
545,452
R2
0.871
0.872
0.870
0.872


===== [PAGE 41] =====

1823
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Table 16   Investigating vintage 
effects
Baseline is gasoline vehicles from 2016 to 2021. Early refers to the 
vehicles from 2011 to 2015.
Only the vehicles that are 5 years or younger are included to make it 
comparable between time periods.
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses. There are 61 clus-
ters.
Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on the observations that have missing mileage and 
those that have missing new car price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
Without make 
fixed effects
With make fixed effects
Age
− 0.0694***
− 0.0749***
(0.00471)
(0.00509)
Electric × age
− 0.0445***
− 0.0295***
(0.0130)
(0.0105)
Early × age
− 0.0265***
− 0.0230***
(0.00587)
(0.00558)
Early × electric × age
− 0.0363**
− 0.0382***
(0.0142)
(0.0126)
Ln new price
1.062***
1.011***
(0.0202)
(0.0299)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0785***
− 0.0784***
(0.00629)
(0.00602)
Ln mileage × electric
− 0.0224**
− 0.0371***
(0.0105)
(0.00490)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Make fixed effects
N
Y
Observations
460,146
460,146
R2
0.857
0.876


===== [PAGE 42] =====

1824
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Table 17   Different price categories
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make × fuel, in parentheses.
There are 39 clusters in (1), 54 clusters in (2), 50 clusters in (3) and 44 clusters in (4).
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year times fuel fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/
advertised.
p25, p50 and p75 refers to the statistics of the new vehicle price for the vehicles of all fuel types that are 
advertised on finn.no.
The 75th percentile is 461 275 NOK, the 50th percentile is 359 900 NOK and the 25th percentile is 275 600 
NOK.
73% of the electric vehicles that are over the median is Tesla.
79% of the electric vehicles that are over the 75th percentile is Tesla.
Those that have missing new vehicle price is not part of this analysis (6921 observations).
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Over
Over
Below
Below
p75
p50
p50
p25
Age
− 0.103***
− 0.1000***
− 0.108***
− 0.104***
(0.0126)
(0.00956)
(0.00470)
(0.00592)
Electric × age
0.0406***
0.0245**
− 0.0636***
− 0.0767***
(0.0138)
(0.0107)
(0.0182)
(0.0171)
Ln new price
1.000***
0.961***
1.116***
1.197***
(0.0407)
(0.0408)
(0.0311)
(0.0483)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0835***
− 0.0709***
− 0.0786***
− 0.0891***
(0.0105)
(0.00895)
(0.00734)
(0.00457)
Ln mileage × electric
− 0.0625***
− 0.0476***
0.000393
− 0.0165
(0.00742)
(0.00888)
(0.0121)
(0.0124)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Observations
80,045
142,580
394,213
249,364
R2
0.781
0.812
0.817
0.812


===== [PAGE 43] =====

1825
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Table 18   The cars grouped into when they where new
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses.
There are 54 clusters in (1), 53 clusters in (2) and 50 clusters in (3).
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline.
Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car 
price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
New in 2011–2013
New in 2014–2016
New in 2017–2021
Age
− 0.127***
− 0.0814***
− 0.0585***
(0.00765)
(0.00825)
(0.00827)
Electric × age
− 0.212***
− 0.0392
− 0.0308*
(0.0780)
(0.0382)
(0.0163)
Ln new price
1.078***
1.107***
1.039***
(0.0368)
(0.0322)
(0.0261)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.105***
− 0.0905***
− 0.0800***
(0.00598)
(0.00958)
(0.00970)
Ln mileage × electric
0.00542
− 0.0200
− 0.0402***
(0.0637)
(0.0187)
(0.00385)
Year× fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Observations
183,165
213,809
148,478
R2
0.847
0.840
0.861


===== [PAGE 44] =====

1826
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Table 19   Comparing 0–3-year-old used vehicles sold in different time periods
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses.
There are 45 clusters in (1), 54 clusters in (2) and 53 clusters in (3).
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline.
Year × fuel fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car 
price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
Sold in 2011–2013
Sold in 2014–2017
Sold in 2018-2021
Age
− 0.0839***
− 0.0801***
− 0.0688***
(0.00914)
(0.00619)
(0.00689)
Electric × age
− 0.105***
− 0.0742***
− 0.0251
(0.0226)
(0.0241)
(0.0134)
Ln new price
0.980***
1.063***
1.038***
(0.0226)
(0.0311)
(0.0195)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0403***
− 0.0666***
− 0.0847***
(0.00323)
(0.00696)
(0.00935)
Ln mileage × electric
− 0.0114
0.00312
− 0.0393***
(0.0128)
(0.0217)
(0.00540)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Observations
22,475
129,214
179,592
R2
0.825
0.854
0.858


===== [PAGE 45] =====

1827
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Table 20   Comparing different 
age groups
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses.
There are 61 clusters in (1), 54 clusters in (2) and 53 clusters in (3).
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline.
Year × fuel fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/
advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and 
those that have missing new car price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
Age 0–3
Age 4–6
Age 7–10
Age
− 0.0766***
− 0.112***
− 0.145***
(0.00438)
(0.00584)
(0.00883)
Electric × age
− 0.0341**
− 0.0697***
− 0.204***
(0.0138)
(0.0258)
(0.0540)
Ln new price
1.046***
1.117***
1.179***
(0.0136)
(0.0397)
(0.0454)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0700***
− 0.153***
− 0.292***
(0.00616)
(0.0118)
(0.0173)
Ln mileage × electric
− 0.0258***
− 0.0102
− 0.0718
(0.00685)
(0.0490)
(0.0992)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Observations
331,281
164,848
49,323
R2
0.857
0.814
0.813


===== [PAGE 46] =====

1828
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Table 21   Table 3 with all fuels and electric vehicles as the baseline
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age
− 0.166***
− 0.165***
− 0.156***
− 0.168***
− 0.168***
(0.0188)
(0.0191)
(0.0198)
(0.0170)
(0.0197)
Gasoline × age
0.0630***
0.0629***
0.0497**
0.0567***
0.0571***
(0.0188)
(0.0191)
(0.0195)
(0.0171)
(0.0196)
Hybrid × age
0.0843***
0.0861***
0.0714***
0.0864***
0.0796***
(0.0196)
(0.0201)
(0.0206)
(0.0188)
(0.0200)
Diesel × age
0.0305*
0.0296
0.0210
0.0400**
0.0273
(0.0175)
(0.0178)
(0.0190)
(0.0150)
(0.0183)
Plug-in hybrid × age
0.0767***
0.0755***
0.0580***
0.0832***
0.0720***
(0.0200)
(0.0184)
(0.0216)
(0.0170)
(0.0209)
Ln new price
1.091***
1.056***
1.025***
1.092***
1.082***
(0.0246)
(0.0270)
(0.0378)
(0.0320)
(0.0247)
Ln mileage × electric
0.0142
0.0180
− 0.00352
0.0117
0.00670
(0.0120)
(0.0125)
(0.00915)
(0.0145)
(0.0119)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0779***
− 0.0772***
− 0.0780***
− 0.0610***
− 0.0786***
(0.00832)
(0.00746)
(0.00845)
(0.00559)
(0.00829)
Ln mileage × hybrid
− 0.109***
− 0.112***
− 0.107***
− 0.108***
− 0.111***
(0.0147)
(0.0144)
(0.0144)
(0.0157)
(0.0145)
Ln mileage × diesel
− 0.0973***
− 0.0934***
− 0.0989***
− 0.0735***
− 0.105***
(0.0126)
(0.0122)
(0.0133)
(0.00919)
(0.0129)
Ln mileage × plug− in hybrid
− 0.0608***
− 0.0598***
− 0.0524***
− 0.0608***
− 0.0629***
(0.0103)
(0.0120)
(0.00849)
(0.0108)
(0.0103)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer category fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Body style fixed effects
N
Y
N
N
N
Make fixed effects
N
N
Y
N
N


===== [PAGE 47] =====

1829
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors are clustered on make, in parentheses.
There are 66 clusters in all specifications except in (4) where there are 49 clusters.
Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
Electric vehicles are the baseline.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car price.
Hydrogen and gas vehicles are not part of this as there are few observations.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
Table 21   (continued)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Taken out those with large variation in new vehicle price 
and those without new vehicle price
N
N
N
Y
N
Observations
1,427,053
1,427,053
1,427,053
768,179
1,427,053
R2
0.847
0.851
0.860
0.895
0.844


===== [PAGE 48] =====

1830
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Fig. 11   The price decline for electric cars with different driving range, using 0.75 instead of 0.65 as con-
verting rate between the range standard NEDC and WLTP
Fig. 12   The price path of electric vs gasoline vehicles, both with price of the new vehicle over the median. 
The grey area is the 95% confidence interval. The standard errors are clustered on make × fuel


===== [PAGE 49] =====

1831
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Makes
There is a large difference in the average price fall between the different makes, which 
can be seen in Fig. 14. This can be due to different vintage or age of the cars, since elec-
tric Nissan entered the market in 2011, while electric Jaguar entered the market in 2018, 
but there can also be other reasons. There is a pattern where makes with large price fall 
Fig. 13   Mean of the answers to the question about whether the battery has degraded since the car was new. 
The higher the better experience of the battery from 1 to 5
Fig. 14   The average price fall for electric vehicles of different makes. The red lines mark the average price 
fall for electric vehicles ( −0.173) and the average price fall for gasoline vehicles ( −0.106), based on the 
result in column 1 in Table 3. The grey line mark 0


===== [PAGE 50] =====

1832
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
have small cars with four seats (Smart, Fiat, Mitsubishi, Peugeot, Citroën).26 Further, 
the majority of Ford’s and Renault’s models cannot fast charge, and the price fall of 
these cars is also above average of electric vehicles.27
The majority of the used cars sold from Tesla, Opel, Jaguar, Audi and Polestar have 
range above 400 km, and these makes have less than 10% price fall. Polestar has a price 
increase. Hyundai, which has a price fall in the same magnitude as Opel, has a model 
with range above 400  km (Hyundai Kona with range 449  km), but the sample also 
include Hyundai Ioniq which has 180 km28-311 km.
We also make this plot controlling for the new vehicle price when the car was sold, 
instead of when the car was new, in Appendix Fig. 15. This changes the estimate for 
some of the makes, for instance Tesla.
We compare the price path of some specific models and makes. The most sold sec-
ondhand electric model, Nissan Leaf, compared to the most sold secondhand gasoline 
model, Volkswagen Golf, (see Table 11) can be seen in Fig. 16.
In Fig. 17 we compare gasoline vehicles where the new car price more than the median 
price of new vehicles with Tesla in the same price range. We see that Tesla fall less in price 
than gasoline vehicles.
Fig. 15   Price fall for different makes controlling for the price of the new model when the car was sold, not 
when the car was new. The red lines mark the average price fall for electric vehicles ( −0.173) and the average 
price fall for gasoline vehicles ( −0.106), based on the result in column 1 in Table3. The grey line mark 0
26  The exception is BMW which has a price fall close to the average for gasoline vehicles.
27  Mercedes-Benz B-class can also not fast charge, but the price fall of this make is close to the average of 
electric vehicles. Toyota have not until recently supplied full electric vehicles and the Toyotas that is part of 
this sample is 147 RAV4 that was new during the years 2012–2015.
28  The range is converted from NEDC range, see the Appendix B.3.1 for explanation.


===== [PAGE 51] =====

1833
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Fig. 16   Price path of the most sold used electric vehicle Nissan Leaf, compared to the most sold used gaso-
line vehicle, Volkswagen Golf. The grey area is the 95% confidence interval. The standard errors are robust
Fig. 17   The price path of Tesla vs gasoline vehicles. The grey area is the 95% confidence interval. Here we 
compare the Teslas and gasoline vehicles that both have new vehicle price over the median. The standard 
errors are robust


===== [PAGE 52] =====

1834
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Robustness
See Tables 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 and 29, Fig. 18.
Table 22   Robustness check 1: 
controlling for many variables
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline.
Among dealer categories are the make’s professional car sellers base-
line.
Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses.
There are 62 clusters.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and 
those that have missing new car price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
Age
− 0.110***
(0.00288)
Electric × age
− 0.0413**
(0.0179)
Ln new price
0.158***
(0.0394)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0747***
(0.00467)
Ln mileage × electric
− 0.0326***
(0.00513)
Dealer category: private seller
− 0.103***
(0.00780)
Dealer category: professional car seller (not the make’s 
own)
− 0.0509***
(0.00955)
Engine effect
0.00000891
(0.0000207)
Number of seats
− 0.000133
(0.000690)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Body style fixed effects
Y
Make fixed effects
Y
Model fixed effects
Y
Transmission fixed effects
Y
Wheel drive fixed effects
Y
Color fixed effects
Y
Observations
545,452
R2
0.926


===== [PAGE 53] =====

1835
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Table 23   Robustness check 2: Table 3 with new vehicle price the year the vehicle is sold, not the year the 
vehicle is new
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses. There are 62 clusters in all but in (4) where there are 44 
clusters.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car 
price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age
− 0.134***
− 0.132***
− 0.137***
− 0.144***
− 0.155***
(0.00505)
(0.00478)
(0.00477)
(0.00632)
(0.00955)
Electric × age
− 0.0466*** − 0.0464*** − 0.0331*** − 0.0367*** − 0.139***
(0.0121)
(0.0126)
(0.0107)
(0.0125)
(0.0349)
Ln new price when sold
1.059***
1.016***
0.903***
1.068***
0.0211***
(0.0166)
(0.0219)
(0.0222)
(0.0175)
(0.00771)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0651*** − 0.0627*** − 0.0631*** − 0.0387*** − 0.0197
(0.00788)
(0.00682)
(0.00818)
(0.00666)
(0.0168)
Ln mileage × electric
− 0.0332*** − 0.0263*** − 0.0351*** − 0.0305*** 0.154
(0.00613)
(0.00632)
(0.00496)
(0.00621)
(0.107)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Body style fixed effects
N
Y
N
N
N
Make fixed effects
N
N
Y
N
N
Taken out those with large vari-
ation in new vehicle price and 
those without new vehicle price
N
N
N
Y
N
Observations
545 452
545,452
545,452
336,220
545,452
R2
0.791
0.793
0.823
0.817
0.364


===== [PAGE 54] =====

1836
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Table 24   Robustness check 3: Table 3 with new vehicle price and fuel interacted
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses. There are 62 clusters in all but specification (4), where there are 44 clusters.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age
− 0.105***
− 0.103***
− 0.108***
− 0.112***
− 0.110***
(0.00467)
(0.00441)
(0.00404)
(0.00544)
(0.00445)
Electric × age
− 0.0550**
− 0.0550**
− 0.0512**
− 0.0565***
− 0.0554***
(0.0209)
(0.0219)
(0.0198)
(0.0188)
(0.0172)
Ln new price × gasoline
1.065***
1.039***
1.022***
1.087***
1.062***
(0.0245)
(0.0272)
(0.0289)
(0.0265)
(0.0253)
Ln new price × electric
1.089***
1.058***
0.893***
1.090***
1.066***
(0.0337)
(0.0445)
(0.0485)
(0.0760)
(0.0323)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0744***
− 0.0751***
− 0.0747***
− 0.0608***
− 0.0766***
(0.00741)
(0.00620)
(0.00708)
(0.00542)
(0.00752)
Ln mileage × electric
0.00734
0.0106
− 0.00611
0.0122
0.00573
(0.0105)
(0.0112)
(0.00845)
(0.0134)
(0.0102)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Body style fixed effects
N
Y
N
N
N
Make fixed effects
N
N
Y
N
N
Taken out those with large variation in new vehicle price 
and those without new vehicle price
N
N
N
Y
N
Observations
452 743
452,743
452,743
283,785
452,743
R2
0.867
0.868
0.882
0.899
0.862


===== [PAGE 55] =====

1837
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Table 25   Robustness check 4: Table 3 without those with age=0
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses. There are 62 clusters in all but in (4) where there are 44 clusters.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age
− 0.104***
− 0.102***
− 0.108***
− 0.111***
− 0.111***
(0.00473)
(0.00433)
(0.00417)
(0.00555)
(0.00458)
Electric × age
− 0.0693***
− 0.0690***
− 0.0509**
− 0.0621***
− 0.0638***
(0.0192)
(0.0197)
(0.0207)
(0.0171)
(0.0199)
Ln new price
1.077***
1.054***
1.003***
1.101***
1.071***
(0.0256)
(0.0313)
(0.0331)
(0.0318)
(0.0255)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0978***
− 0.0994***
− 0.0953***
− 0.0807***
− 0.0982***
(0.00838)
(0.00695)
(0.00806)
(0.00555)
(0.00843)
Ln mileage × electric
0.00815
0.0104
− 0.0192**
− 0.000644
− 0.00100
(0.0143)
(0.0147)
(0.00880)
(0.0162)
(0.0142)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Body style fixed effects
N
Y
N
N
N
Make fixed effects
N
N
Y
N
N
Taken out those with large variation in new vehicle price 
and those without new vehicle price
N
N
N
Y
N
Observations
494,120
494,120
494,120
299,668
494,120
R2
0.853
0.855
0.875
0.897
0.850


===== [PAGE 56] =====

1838
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Table 26   Robustness check 5: Table 3 without dummy on those that have missing new vehicle price and mileage, meaning that the sample is smaller
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses. There are 44 clusters in all but column 4, where there are 43 clusters.
The sample is smaller by 23,861 observations.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age
− 0.109***
− 0.107***
− 0.111***
− 0.112***
− 0.116***
(0.00457)
(0.00421)
(0.00403)
(0.00547)
(0.00441)
Electric × age
− 0.0545***
− 0.0540**
− 0.0426**
− 0.0579***
− 0.0488**
(0.0197)
(0.0203)
(0.0204)
(0.0173)
(0.0204)
Ln new price
1.071***
1.044***
1.015***
1.090***
1.064***
(0.0232)
(0.0292)
(0.0277)
(0.0298)
(0.0230)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0709***
− 0.0716***
− 0.0720***
− 0.0615***
− 0.0714***
(0.00738)
(0.00594)
(0.00726)
(0.00547)
(0.00734)
Ln mileage × electric
0.0107
0.0133
− 0.00473
0.0132
0.00284
(0.0113)
(0.0118)
(0.00927)
(0.0145)
(0.0113)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Body style fixed effects
N
Y
N
N
N
Make fixed effects
N
N
Y
N
N
Taken out those with large variation in new vehicle price 
and those without new vehicle price
N
N
N
Y
N
Observations
515,705
515,705
515,705
318,478
515,705
R2
0.882
0.883
0.890
0.900
0.879


===== [PAGE 57] =====

1839
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Table 27   Robustness check 6: Table 3 with absolute values instead of ln values
Dependent variable is log of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make, in parentheses. There are 62 clusters in all but in (4) where there are 44 clusters.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age
− 22873.2***
− 21477.6***
− 25096.0***
− 22383.1***
− 22986.3***
(3829.1)
(3518.7)
(3397.9)
(3342.8)
(3716.2)
Electric × age
− 11624.2**
− 11498.8***
− 2585.1
− 7842.4*
− 11515.0**
(4659.1)
(4113.2)
(4397.0)
(4038.9)
(4638.1)
New car price
0.728***
0.703***
0.613***
0.715***
0.729***
(0.0414)
(0.0407)
(0.0217)
(0.0453)
(0.0410)
Mileage × gasoline
− 0.745***
− 0.784***
− 0.659***
− 0.643***
− 0.744***
(0.135)
(0.111)
(0.109)
(0.0984)
(0.138)
Mileage × electric
− 0.0817
− 0.0427
− 0.568***
− 0.198
− 0.0929
(0.133)
(0.130)
(0.165)
(0.149)
(0.134)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Body style fixed effects
N
Y
N
N
N
Make fixed effects
N
N
Y
N
N
Taken out those with large variation in new vehicle 
price and those without new vehicle price
N
N
N
Y
N
Observations
545,452
545,452
545,452
336,220
545,452
R2
0.786
0.790
0.835
0.869
0.786


===== [PAGE 58] =====

1840
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Table 28   Robustness check 7: Table 3 with clusters based on make × fuel
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make × fuel, in parentheses.
There are 90 clusters in all but specification (4), where there are 68 clusters.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age
− 0.105***
− 0.103***
− 0.109***
− 0.112***
− 0.111***
(0.00452)
(0.00421)
(0.00371)
(0.00536)
(0.00441)
Electric × age
− 0.0638***
− 0.0632***
− 0.0468**
− 0.0567***
− 0.0584***
(0.0195)
(0.0199)
(0.0194)
(0.0182)
(0.0202)
Ln new price
1.068***
1.046***
0.998***
1.088***
1.062***
(0.0232)
(0.0287)
(0.0268)
(0.0267)
(0.0229)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0770***
− 0.0776***
− 0.0757***
− 0.0608***
− 0.0775***
(0.00780)
(0.00668)
(0.00717)
(0.00545)
(0.00779)
Ln mileage × electric
0.0170
0.0190
− 0.00448
0.0123
0.00939
(0.0126)
(0.0129)
(0.00798)
(0.0145)
(0.0127)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Body style fixed effects
N
Y
N
N
N
Make fixed effects
N
N
Y
N
N
Taken out those with large variation in new vehicle price 
and those without new vehicle price
N
N
N
Y
N
Observations
545,452
545,452
545,452
336,220
545,452
R2
0.859
0.861
0.879
0.902
0.857


===== [PAGE 59] =====

1841
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Table 29   Robustness check 8: Table 3 with clusters based on make × year the vehicle is new
Dependent variable is ln of the secondhand price.
Standard errors clustered on make × the year the vehicle is new, in parentheses.
There are 482 clusters in all but specification (4), where there are 332 clusters.
Gasoline vehicles are the baseline. Year fixed effects are based on the year the vehicle is sold/advertised.
We use a dummy on those observations that have missing mileage and those that have missing new car price.
* p < 0.10 , ** p < 0.05 , *** p < 0.01
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age
− 0.105***
− 0.103***
− 0.109***
− 0.112***
− 0.111***
(0.00333)
(0.00321)
(0.00295)
(0.00396)
(0.00337)
Electric × age
− 0.0638***
− 0.0632***
− 0.0468***
− 0.0567***
− 0.0584***
(0.0120)
(0.0122)
(0.0111)
(0.0122)
(0.0121)
Ln new price
1.068***
1.046***
0.998***
1.088***
1.062***
(0.0163)
(0.0228)
(0.0167)
(0.0217)
(0.0163)
Ln mileage × gasoline
− 0.0770***
− 0.0776***
− 0.0757***
− 0.0608***
− 0.0775***
(0.00389)
(0.00356)
(0.00360)
(0.00364)
(0.00390)
Ln mileage × electric
0.0170
0.0190
− 0.00448
0.0123
0.00939
(0.0115)
(0.0114)
(0.00698)
(0.0117)
(0.0114)
Year × fuel fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dealer fixed effects
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Body style fixed effects
N
Y
N
N
N
Make fixed effects
N
N
Y
N
N
Taken out those with large variation in new vehicle price 
and those without new vehicle price
N
N
N
Y
N
Observations
545,452
545,452
545,452
336,220
545,452
R2
0.859
0.861
0.879
0.902
0.857


===== [PAGE 60] =====

1842
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Funding  Open access funding provided by Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Acemoglu D, Aghion P, Bursztyn L, Hemous D (2012) The environment and directed technical change. Am 
Econ Rev 102(1):131–66
Adda J, Cooper R (2000) Balladurette and juppette: a discrete analysis of scrapping subsidies. J Polit Econ 
108(4):778–806
Aghion P, Howitt PW (1998) Endogenous growth theory. MIT press, Cambridge
Akerlof GA (1970) The market for “lemons’’: quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. Q J Econ 
84(3):488–500
Archsmith J, Muehlegger E, Rapson DS (2022) Future paths of electric vehicle adoption in the United 
States: predictable determinants. Obstac Oppor Environ Energy Policy Econ 3(1):71–110
Balcer Y, Lippman SA (1984) Technological expectations and adoption of improved technology. J Econ 
Theory 34(2):292–318
Barrett S (2009) The coming global climate-technology revolution. J Econ Perspect 23(2):53–75
Berry S, Levinsohn J, Pakes A (1995) Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Econometrica 63:841–890
Bond EW (1982) A direct test of the “Lemons’’ model: the market for used pickup trucks. Am Econ Rev 
72(4):836–840
Bond EW (1983) Trade in used equipment with heterogeneous firms. J Polit Econ 91(4):688–705
Brückmann G, Wicki M, Bernauer T (2021) Is resale anxiety an obstacle to electric vehicle adoption? 
results from a survey experiment in Switzerland. Environ Res Lett 16(12):124027
Chen C-W, Hu W-M, Knittel CR (2021) Subsidizing fuel-efficient cars: Evidence from China’s automobile 
industry. Am Econ J Econ Pol 13(4):152–84
Commission of the European Communities (1999) Case No COMP/M.1406 - HYUNDAI / KIA
Fig. 18   Binned scatter plot of the data with prices in absolute values


===== [PAGE 61] =====

1843
Climate, Technology and Value: Insights from the First Decade…
1 3
Copeland A, Dunn W, Hall G (2011) Inventories and the automobile market. Rand J Econ 42(1):121–149
Danielis R, Scorrano M, Giansoldati M, Rotaris L (2019) A meta-analysis of the importance of the driving 
range in consumers’ preference studies for battery electric vehicles
De Groote O, Verboven F (2019) Subsidies and time discounting in new technology adoption: evidence 
from solar photovoltaic systems. Am Econ Rev 109(6):2137–72
Dhakal S, Minx J, Toth FL, A A-A, Meza M F, Hubacek K, Jonckheere I, Kim Y-G, Nemet G, Pachauri S, 
Tan X, Wiedmann T, (2022) Emissions trends and drivers. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
New York, NY
Esteban S, Shum M (2007) Durable-goods oligopoly with secondary markets: the case of automobiles. 
Rand J Econ 38(2):332–354
Evyon (2022) Planet-friendly battery energy storage systems. https://​www.​evyon.​com/
Fudenberg D, Tirole J (1998) Upgrades, tradeins, and buybacks. RAND J Econ 29:235–258
fueleconomy.gov (n.d.) Frequently Asked Questions. https://​www.​fuele​conomy.​gov/​feg/​info.​shtml#​sizec​
lasses
Gavazza A, Lizzeri A, Roketskiy N (2014) A quantitative analysis of the used-car market. Am Econ Rev 
104(11):3668–3700
Gillingham K, Iskhakov F, Munk-Nielsen A, Rust JP, Schjerning B (2022) Equilibrium trade in automo-
biles. J Polit Econ 130(10):2534–2593
Glerum A, Stankovikj L, Thémans M, Bierlaire M (2014) Forecasting the demand for electric vehicles: 
accounting for attitudes and perceptions. Transp Sci 48(4):483–499
Gordon BR (2009) A dynamic model of consumer replacement cycles in the PC processor industry. Mark 
Sci 28(5):846–867
Gowrisankaran G, Rysman M (2012) Dynamics of consumer demand for new durable goods. J Polit Econ 
120(6):1173–1219
Green Cars (2021) Cost to maintain an electric car. https://​www.​green​cars.​com/​post/​what-​does-​it-​cost-​to-​
maint​ain-​an-​elect​ric-​car
Guan J (2021) Automobile replacement and government subsidy: an analysis of the CARS program, Avail-
able at SSRN 3873076
Holland SP, Mansur ET, Yates AJ (2021) The electric vehicle transition and the economics of banning gaso-
line vehicles. Am Econ J Econ Pol 13(3):316–44
IEA (2021) Global EV Outlook 2021, Technical report. https://​www.​iea.​org/​repor​ts/​global-​ev-​outlo​ok-​2021
IEA (2022) Global EV Outlook 2022, Technical report. https://​www.​iea.​org/​repor​ts/​global-​ev-​outlo​ok-​2022
IIHS and HLDI (2020) HLDI automobile size and class definitions. https://​www.​iihs.​org/​media/​b19c7​e8c-​
54ea-​4a35-​a3bb-​3a05f​a2a5c​16/​g5MZTA/​Ratin​gs/​Proto​cols/​curre​nt/​hdi-​auto-​size-​class.​pdf
Ishihara M, Ching AT (2019) Dynamic demand for new and used durable goods without physical deprecia-
tion: the case of Japanese video games. Mark Sci 38(3):392–416
Power JD (2020) Electric Vehicle Range Testing: Understanding NEDC vs. WLTP vs. EPA. https://​www.​
jdpow​er.​com/​Cars/​Shopp​ing-​Guides/​elect​ric-​vehic​le-​range-​testi​ng-​under​stand​ing-​nedc-​vs-​wltp-​vs-​epa
Kelleher Environmental (2019). Research study on reuse and recycling of batteries employed in electric 
vehicles: The technical, environmental, economic, energy and cost implications of reusing and recy-
cling ev batteries, Technical report
Li S, Liu Y, Wei C (2020) The cost of greening stimulus: A dynamic discrete choice analysis of vehicle 
scrappage programs
Liu Y, Cirillo C (2017) A generalized dynamic discrete choice model for green vehicle adoption. Trans Res 
Procedia 23:868–886
Meld. St. 33 (2016-2017) National Transport Plan 2018–2029. Report to the Storting (white paper) English 
Summary, Technical report
Mian A, Sufi A (2012) The effects of fiscal stimulus: evidence from the 2009 cash for clunkers program. Q 
J Econ 127(3):1107–1142
Muehlegger E, Rapson DS (2022) Subsidizing low-and middle-income adoption of electric vehicles: 
Quasi-experimental evidence from California. J Public Econ 216:104752
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (n.d.). Frequently Asked Questions. https://​www.​nhtsa.​
gov/​ratin​gs
Nichols D (2022) Battery degradation and how to prevent it. https://​www.​green​cars.​com/​green​cars-​101/​
batte​ry-​degra​dation-​and-​how-​to-​preve​nt-​it
OFV (2024) Bilsalget i desember og hele 2023. Accessed February 26 2024. https://​ofv.​no/​bilsa​lget/​
bilsa​lget-i-​desem​ber-​2023
Pathak M, Slade R, Shukla P, Skea J, Pichs-Madruga R, Ürge Vorsatz D (2022) Technical summary. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New York, NY
Porter R H, Sattler P (1999) Patterns of trade in the market for used durables: Theory and evidence


===== [PAGE 62] =====

1844
	
G. L. Andreassen, J. T. Lind 
1 3
Purohit D (1992) Exploring the relationship between the markets for new and used durable goods: the 
case of automobiles. Mark Sci 11(2):154–167
Rosenberg N (1976) On technological expectations. Econ J 86(343):523–535
Rust J (1987) Optimal replacement of GMC bus engines: an empirical model of Harold Zurcher. Econo-
metrica 55:999–1033
Sallee JM, West SE, Fan W (2016) Do consumers recognize the value of fuel economy? Evidence from 
used car prices and gasoline price fluctuations. J Public Econ 135:61–73
Schiraldi P (2011) Automobile replacement: a dynamic structural approach. Rand J Econ 42(2):266–291
Schloter L (2022) Empirical analysis of the depreciation of electric vehicles compared to gasoline vehi-
cles. Transp Policy 126:268–279
Solow RM, Tobin J, von Weizsäcker CC, Yaari M (1966) Neoclassical growth with fixed factor propor-
tions. Rev Econ Stud 33(2):79–115
Springel K (2021) Network externality and subsidy structure in two-sided markets: evidence from elec-
tric vehicle incentives. Am Econ J Econ Policy 13(4):393–432
Stock JH (2020) Climate change, climate policy, and economic growth. NBER Macroecon Annu 
34(1):399–419
Stolyarov D (2002) Turnover of used durables in a stationary equilibrium: are older goods traded more? 
J Polit Econ 110(6):1390–1413
Strittmatter A, Lechner M (2020) Sorting in the used-car market after the Volkswagen emission scandal. 
J Environ Econ Manag 101:102305
The Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association (2021a) Bruktbil-bonanza: Nå topper elbilene blant to år 
gamle biler. https://​elbil.​no/​na-​topper-​elbil​ene-​blant-​to-​ar-​gamle-​biler/
The Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association (2021b) Prisene presses: Nå kan du gjøre et elbil-kupp. 
https://​elbil.​no/​prise​ne-​press​es-​na-​kan-​du-​gjore-​et-​elbil-​kupp/
The Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association (2022a) The electric vehicle selector. https://​elbil​velge​ren.​
elbil.​no/
The Norwegian Electric Vehicle Association (2022b) Nybilsalget 2021: Nå selges det flere elbiler enn 
dieselbiler i Europa. https://​elbil.​no/​na-​selges-​det-​flere-​elbil​er-​enn-​diese​lbiler-​i-​europa/
The Norwegian Tax Administration (n.d.) Calculating the one-off registration tax for plug-in hybrids. 
https://​www.​skatt​eetat​en.​no/​en/​person/​duties/​cars-​and-​other-​vehic​les/​impor​ting/​which-​duties-​do-​you-​
have-​to-​pay/​one-​off-​regis​trati​on-​tax/​what-​is-​the-​one-​off-​regis​trati​on-​tax/​calcu​lating-​the-​one-​off-​regis​
trati​on-​tax-​for-​plug-​in-​hybri​ds/
The Renault Group (2020) The wltp: a standard that car drivers can understand. https://​www.​renau​ltgro​up.​
com/​en/​news-​on-​air/​news/​the-​wltp-a-​stand​ard-​that-​car-​drive​rs-​can-​under​stand/
Waldman M (2003) Durable goods theory for real world markets. J Econ Perspect 17(1):131–154
Wykoff F C (1970) The average price fall for electric. The Rev Econ Stat pp 168–172
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
