

===== [PAGE 1] =====

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECT OF FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS ON VEHICLE WEIGHT DISPERSION 
AND ACCIDENT FATALITIES
Antonio Bento
Kenneth Gillingham
Kevin Roth
Working Paper 23340
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23340
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017
The authors thank John Graham, Ashley Langer, and Josh Linn; the participants at the NE 
Workshop on Env. Economics, IIOC, and UCE3; and seminars at CU Boulder, Indiana 
University, Ifo Institute, UC-Irvine, UC-Berkeley, UCSD, Yale, and Wyoming for helpful 
comments. The authors are grateful to Yiwei Wang and Paige Weber for excellent research 
assistance and to UCE3 for funding. The authors also thank Don MacKenzie for the CAFE credit 
data and Pawel Zal from www.automobile-catalog.com for vehicle characteristics data. The 
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Antonio Bento, Kenneth Gillingham, and Kevin Roth. All rights reserved. Short 
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission 
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.


===== [PAGE 2] =====

The Effect of Fuel Economy Standards on Vehicle Weight Dispersion and Accident Fatalities
Antonio Bento, Kenneth Gillingham, and Kevin Roth
NBER Working Paper No. 23340
April 2017
JEL No. H23,I18,Q48,Q58,R41
ABSTRACT
The firm response to regulation is seldom as controversial as in the context of fuel economy 
standards, a dominant policy to reduce emissions from vehicles worldwide. It has long been 
argued that such standards lead to vehicle weight changes that increase accident fatalities. Using 
unconditional quantile regression, we are the first to document the effect of the Corporate 
Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards on the vehicle weight distribution. We find that on net 
CAFE reduced fatalities, with lowered mean weight dominating increased dispersion. When 
monetized, this effect suggests positive net benefits from CAFE even with no undervaluation of 
fuel economy.
Antonio Bento
Sol Price School of Public Policy
 and Department of Economics
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0626
and NBER
abento@usc.edu
Kenneth Gillingham
School of Forestry and Environmental Studies
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
kenneth.gillingham@yale.edu
Kevin Roth
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
kroth1@uci.edu
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23340


===== [PAGE 3] =====

1
Introduction
For decades economists have pushed policy makers towards more ﬂexible regulations to
correct market failures.
Flexible regulations allow ﬁrms to use the lowest-cost channels,
including channels unforeseen by regulators (Stavins, 1998; Carlson et al., 2000).
Such
unanticipated channels may lower the cost, but in some cases can mean that the policy fails
to fully correct the market failure (Auﬀhammer and Kellogg, 2011) or exacerbates other
unpriced externalities.
These issues are particularly notable when regulating the automobile industry.
Reg-
ulation aﬀecting the average fuel economy of light-duty vehicles—the primary approach
used in the United States and many other countries to reduce vehicle oil consumption and
emissions—has long faced critiques for leaving open a multitude of channels for ﬁrms to
meet the regulation (Austin and Dinan, 2005; Bento et al., 2009; Jacobsen, 2013a). Among
the channels most important to policymakers is the ability of ﬁrms to meet the standard by
reducing vehicle weight (Knittel, 2011; Klier and Linn, 2012).
It is well established by the ‘arms-race’ literature that occupants of lighter-weight ve-
hicles face a higher risk of fatality in multi-vehicle crashes (White, 2004; Anderson and
Auﬀhammer, 2014; Li, 2012). If ﬁrms decrease vehicle weight as a strategy for increasing
fuel economy, drivers of these vehicles may be at an elevated risk of a fatality when struck in
an accident. It has long been argued that Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) stan-
dards increase fatalities based on evidence suggesting that occupants of lighter vehicles are
at a greater risk of a fatality and that CAFE standards decreased the mean vehicle weight,
and thus must have increased fatalities (Crandall and Graham, 1989). Given typical values
of statistical life, even a small change in fatalities due to reduced mean vehicle weight could
result in costs even larger than the direct compliance costs of the regulation.
A possible concern with focusing only on mean weight is that both the mean and disper-
sion of weight can be expected to matter for fatalities (Anderson and Auﬀhammer, 2014).
For example, suppose CAFE standards led to a decrease in the mean weight through a
2


===== [PAGE 4] =====

down-weighting of the heaviest vehicles. Then the weight distribution could be compressed
by CAFE, reducing weight dispersion and perhaps even lowering accident fatalities. The
mean and dispersion of weight in accidents have a clear parallel to the classic arms-race
metaphor: an unarmed society will face greater casualties when in a conﬂict with an armed
society, but the total casualties would be lower if both societies disarm.
This paper examines the tension between mean weight and weight dispersion, by tak-
ing advantage of new unconditional quantile regression methods. Understanding the full
distribution of weight changes is critical to disentangling the implications of CAFE on fa-
talities, but until recently the tools for such an analysis have been lacking. We examine
this question using unconditional quantile regression, an approach largely isolated to the
labor literature (Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo, 2009), most prominently in the examination of
unions on wage dispersion (DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux, 1996). We investigate the rela-
tionship between CAFE regulations and vehicle weight, estimating changes to the full weight
distribution. While OLS regression can provide an estimate of the change in mean weight,
standard quantile estimates are conditional on the included covariates and are insuﬃcient
for understanding the eﬀect on the unconditional distribution of weight. We are particularly
interested in the unconditional distribution, since this distribution determines the dispersion
of vehicle weights sold on the market, and thus inﬂuences accident fatalities. In addition
to using the unconditional quantile approach, we also carefully consider the measurement
of the CAFE regulation’s stringency and develop multiple measures to improve on prior
studies and lend credibility to our estimates. We apply our estimates of the eﬀect of CAFE
on the weight distribution to a large set of accidents, separating the eﬀects for single and
multi-vehicle accidents and simulating fatalities in a counterfactual without CAFE.
To estimate these eﬀects we use two unique datasets. For the ﬁrst dataset, we bring
together two large databases that detail trim-level statistics on vehicles sold in the United
States between 1954 and 2005. These data allow us to examine manufacturer oﬀerings not
only during the period where CAFE was changing but also before CAFE. We document
3


===== [PAGE 5] =====

that CAFE is associated with a lowering of the mean vehicle weight and an increase in
the dispersion. While heavy vehicles were down-weighted, already light-weight vehicles saw
larger declines in weight, amounting to 40-50 lbs per 1 miles-per-gallon (MPG) increase
in the standard. The implication of this heterogeneous response is that CAFE standards
increased dispersion in a key part of the domestic vehicle market. One plausible explanation
for this result is that ﬁrms pursued diﬀerent strategies for products sold to diﬀerent types
of consumers. Consumers of low-weight vehicles may be more likely to be price sensitive
and less sensitive to weight, implying that an optimal strategy for CAFE compliance would
be to down-weight these smaller vehicles. Consumers of larger vehicles are likely willing to
pay more to preserve attributes, and thus the optimal compliance strategy may have been
to add costly technology. Importantly, the heterogeneous response we ﬁnd is consistent with
multiple-product ﬁrms having multiple responses to regulation, and in the case of CAFE,
these multiple responses are not well represented by the mean statistic.
The second dataset contains 17 million police-reported accidents from 13 states between
1989 and 2005, which allows us to estimate the eﬀect of vehicle weight on fatalities. We
ﬁnd that dispersion is linked with a higher likelihood of a fatality, while lower mean weight
reduces the likelihood of a fatality in both single-vehicle and multi-vehicle crashes. When
we apply the estimated weight changes to these observed accidents, the simulation indicates
that the regulation decreased fatalities by 171 to 439 per year depending on the year and
assumptions.
This result is critical for policy: our illustrative calculations suggest that
CAFE standards are more likely to have positive net beneﬁts once we account for the saved
lives. Further, CAFE may have positive net beneﬁts even if the value of future fuel savings
is not included as a beneﬁt. This is particularly relevant because future fuel savings would
not be a beneﬁt for a rational consumer perfectly valuing the attribute of fuel economy, and
economic evidence is building that consumers only slightly undervalue fuel economy, if at
all (Allcott and Wozny, 2014; Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer, 2013; Sallee, West, and Fan,
2016). Although the introduction of the new footprint-based standard limits our ability
4


===== [PAGE 6] =====

to predict attribute changes for the recent increases ushered in by Presidents Bush and
Obama, concerns that the increases will result in more traﬃc fatalities are not supported by
our empirical analysis.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on the policy
and relevant literature. Section 3 describes the data sources used. Section 4 discusses the
methodology used to measure dispersion in the vehicle ﬂeet and section 5 reports the results.
Section 6 details the simulation of counterfactual fatalities and the estimation of the fatality
risk parameters used in that simulation. Section 7 concludes.
2
Background and Literature Review
The United States ﬁrst implemented CAFE standards in 1975 in the wake of the 1973
Arab oil embargo.1 Under the regulation, the harmonic average fuel economy of new vehicles
sold by each ﬁrm was required to meet or exceed a target that was diﬀerentiated by car and
truck ﬂeet.2 For cars the average rose from 17 MPG to 27.5 MPG between 1978 and 1990
and it remained frozen at that level until revised in 2010. For light-trucks the standard
was more complex. From 1979 to 1982 ﬁrms were required to satisfy separate standards
for two-wheel drive (2WD) and four-wheel-drive (4WD) vehicles. From 1982 to 1991 ﬁrms
could either satisfy the separate 2WD and 4WD standards3 or a single standard that rose
from 17.5 to 20.2 MPG. From 1992 to 1996 ﬁrms were required to satisfy a single standard
that rose from 20.2 to 20.7 and it remained ﬁxed at 20.7 until 2005.4 Figure 1 illustrates the
pattern of CAFE standards over time.
Under CAFE standards prior to 2011, when the fuel economy of a ﬁrm’s ﬂeet exceeded
1Originally passed as a way of reducing exposure to foreign oil imports, the regulation was administered
by the National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration but the vehicles were tested by the EPA.
2Firms are also required to meet the standard separately for imported and domestically produced vehicles.
3The 2WD standard rose from 17.2 to 20.7 MPG between 1979 and 1991 while the 4WD standard rose
from 15.8 to 19.1 MPG during that same time period.
4CAFE applies to all vehicles with gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) below 8,500 lbs although prior
to 1980 the maximum was 6,000 lbs GVWR. The GVWR is the maximum weight of the vehicle when loaded,
but we focus our analysis on the curb weight, which is the weight of the vehicle without cargo.
5


===== [PAGE 7] =====

the target, ﬁrms generated credits that could be carried forward or back by three years
but could not be traded between ﬁrms or between ﬂeets. Any ﬁrm that did not meet the
standard and failed to generate credits within three years was considered out of compliance
and ﬁned $55 per vehicle for every MPG below the standard on average in the ﬂeet.
Automobile manufacturers have diﬀerent product oﬀerings, leading to heterogeneous ef-
fects of the regulation on diﬀerent manufacturers.
The domestic ﬁrms (Ford, GM, and
Chrysler) were required to improve the fuel economy of their ﬂeet to meet the standards,
the Asian automakers already exceeded the standards, and the European automakers largely
opted to pay ﬁnes rather than completely comply (Jacobsen, 2013a). In this paper, we ex-
amine all ﬂeets, but focus primarily on the domestic car ﬂeet because it covers a large share
of the vehicles on the road during all time periods and the vast majority of vehicles at the
inception of CAFE standards.
There are several channels automakers can use to meet CAFE standards. They can add
more-eﬃcient technology. They can shift large cars from a passenger vehicle chassis to a
light truck chassis (e.g., a cross-over) so that a less-stringent standard applies.5 They can
increase prices on ineﬃcient vehicles and decrease prices on eﬃcient vehicles to push sales
towards more fuel-eﬃcient vehicles (Jacobsen, 2013a). Finally, they can alter horsepower
or weight to improve fuel economy without using new technology (Klier and Linn, 2012;
Knittel, 2011).6
As discussed above, the possibility that automakers might lower vehicle weight in response
to CAFE has generated substantial concern and has been a crucial point of opposition to
raising the standard since the earliest years of the policy.7 The literature has taken two
approaches to quantify the fatalities from CAFE standards. Early work used time series
5A similar conversion is possible between 2WD and 4WD vehicles during the earliest years of the truck
standard.
6There were also short-term loopholes that allowed manufacturers to meet the standard with sales of
ﬂex-fuel vehicles at various points in time (Anderson and Sallee, 2011).
7An attempt in 1991 to further raise the standard was opposed over concerns that it would “deprive
the consumer of a full-sized family vehicle” and “have adverse eﬀects on vehicle safety.” See the opening
statements by Senator Bryan (D-Nev) on the Motor Vehicle Fuel Eﬃciency Act February 21, 1991.
6


===== [PAGE 8] =====

variation to directly estimate the eﬀect of mean vehicle weight on annual fatalities. For
example, Crandall and Graham (1989) showed that CAFE was associated with a 500 lbs
decrease in mean vehicle weight and that vehicles that are 500 lbs lighter are associated with
a 27% higher likelihood of a fatality. This would suggest that CAFE increased fatalities
by 2,000 to 3,000 annually. Several follow-on papers used the same variation but diﬀerent
model speciﬁcations to come to diﬀerent conclusions (Noland, 2004; Ahmad and Greene,
2005). More recently, the focus has moved to vehicle weight dispersion and in this literature
CAFE is modeled as changing relative prices in order to shift drivers towards more eﬃcient
vehicle classes (White, 2004; Jacobsen, 2013b). These studies also show increases in fatalities
from CAFE standards, but make the restrictive assumption that manufacturers hold vehicle
weight constant. In contrast, other recent literature suggests that over a medium-run time
frame of 3-5 years, attribute changes are a much more cost-eﬀective way to comply with the
standards (Klier and Linn, 2012).
Going forward, the eﬀect of CAFE standards is likely to be all the more complicated due
to the switch to footprint-based standards. Both weight and footprint are known to inﬂuence
vehicle fatalities, but in opposite directions (Wenzel, 2013). The footprint standard allows
ﬁrms to down-weight vehicles to improve fuel economy, as in the past, but incentivizes them
to hold constant or increase the vehicle footprint, which in theory may reduce fatalities.
This is in contrast to weight-based standards; for example, Ito and Sallee (2014) show that
weight-based standards in Japan exacerbate accident externalities.
3
Data Description
3.1
Data Overview
To analyze the eﬀect of CAFE on vehicle weight and fatalities, we collected and combined
several unique datasets. These include a large trim-level dataset on vehicles from 1954 to
2005 that allows us to examine the eﬀect of manufacturer decisions on the attributes of
7


===== [PAGE 9] =====

vehicles produced each model year. From these data we generate estimates that allow us to
simulate vehicle weights in a counterfatual without the CAFE standard. We connect these
to accident outcomes using data on police-reported accidents that describe the vehicles and
fatality outcomes of 17 million crashes from 1989 to 2005.
3.2
Vehicle Data
Data on the weight of vehicles comes from two data sources, Ward’s Automotive Year-
books (Ward’s) and Automobile Catalog (AC).8 AC is a database of automobile charac-
teristics collected from various sources, including back issues of Popular Mechanics and
manufacturer documentation. These data include trim level statistics on vehicles sold in the
United States between 1954 and 2005. We focus our attention on cars and light trucks be-
low 8,500 lbs gross-vehicle-weight-rating (GVWR), the maximum regulated by CAFE, and
below 6,000 lbs GVWR before 1980.9
While Ward’s provides detailed data on trim-level speciﬁcations after 1981, there is less
detail between 1971 and 1981, and no data are available before 1971. Fortunately, AC data
provide detail on vehicles going back to 1954 and help to ﬁll in the gaps in the critical ramp-
up period of CAFE between 1971 and 1981 and to examine pre-CAFE trends in fuel economy.
These data are used to create one of our measures of CAFE stringency: automaker-speciﬁc
predictions of average fuel economy in a world without CAFE standards. The AC data
include all domestic manufacturers as well as a few foreign manufacturers, including Audi,
Honda, and Mazda.
In our analysis we focus on trim-level data rather than sales-level data, since we are
most interested in the weight of the vehicles that the manufacturers chose to produce and
how those decisions inﬂuenced accidents. We then directly capture the prevalence of those
trim-level vehicles in crashes using the police-reported accident data. We are not aware of
8This data source is maintained by Pawel Zal at www.automobile-catalog.com.
9We generally focus on the curb weight of the vehicle, which is the weight of the empty vehicle while
GVWR is the maximum operating weight of the vehicle.
8


===== [PAGE 10] =====

any source that records sales data before 1975 and such data is sparse up to 1985, limiting
the usefulness of a sales-weighted analysis. Furthermore, the model-level sales data that
are available are more highly aggregated than the trim-level data, which is problematic for
our approach because individual quantile estimation requires substantial data to precisely
estimate coeﬃcients.10
Table 1 shows the mean and standard deviation of new vehicle weight and observation
counts for various manufacturers and product segments. These are given for 5-year periods
except for 1975-1977 and 1978-1979, which are split at the introductory year of CAFE.
This table demonstrates the well-known drop in vehicle weight that occurred during the
introduction of CAFE: the mean vehicle weight of cars dropped from 3,755 lbs in 1970 to
2,963 lbs in 1985. The standard deviation of vehicle weight was at a maximum between 1975
and 1977, a time period when the standards initially ramped up and when existing on-road
vehicles were still relatively heavy at 3,600 lbs. The minimum dispersion occurred in 1985,
the year where car weight is at the lightest in our data. These simple summary statistics
already indicate that lowering the mean may not increase dispersion.
3.3
Accident and Fatality Data
We use the State Data System (SDS) dataset maintained by the National Highway Traﬃc
Safety Administration (NHTSA) to recover the eﬀect of vehicle weight on total fatalities and
to simulate counterfactual fatality outcomes. Although 21 states are available through the
SDS, only 13 states had suﬃcient information to be used in our analysis. These states are
Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Kansas, Michigan, Missouri, Nebraska, New Mexico, New York,
North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Washington.11
10We perform robustness checks in the appendix using sales-weighted regressions; the results are similar
but far less precise due to the signiﬁcant aggregation. The similarity in point estimates is perhaps unsurpris-
ing as popular models of vehicles seem to result in a proliferation of diﬀerent trim options for those models.
Conditional on model year and class, sales explain more than 37% of the variation in the count of trims
where sales data exists.
11Our data diﬀers somewhat from that used by Anderson and Auﬀhammer (2014). Kentucky and Mary-
land no longer allow access to their data. Ohio and Wyoming did not have VINs to allow us to decode. Our
9


===== [PAGE 11] =====

We obtained permission from each state to use the data, which consists of all police-
reported accidents. Each crash in the data is given an identiﬁer linking all vehicles and
individuals involved in the crash. There is considerable variation by state and year in the
variables recorded for each crash, but our simplest regressions require only the number of
vehicles involved, the VINs for each vehicle, and the presence of fatalities. The requirement
of a decodable VIN is the strongest restriction on our data. VINs are a unique serial number
for all motor vehicles and the ﬁrst nine digits allow us to decode the year, model, make,
and vehicle weight of each automobile involved in a crash. Of the crashes, 38% are dropped
because one more more vehicles do not have a usable VIN. Some common reasons a VIN
cannot be decoded are that the vehicle was produced before 1981, it is a heavy-duty vehicle,
moped or motorcycle, or because of a recording error.12 Some regressions also make use of
variables that are not present in all states such as the county of accident, seatbelt use, or
vehicle speed.
For our regressions and simulations we use only crashes involving one, two, or three
vehicles.
We omit all crashes that involve pedestrians, motorcycles, or bicycles and we
assume that CAFE had no eﬀect on these fatality outcomes. We also assume that fatality
outcomes for crashes involving more than three vehicles, which represent less than 5% of
crashes, are also unaﬀected by CAFE. These restrictions eliminate 43% of total crashes,
but a larger fraction of fatalities, 56%, because accidents with pedestrians, bicycles and
motorcycles are deadlier on average.
3.4
Other Data Sources
Nominal annual gasoline prices from 1954 to 2005 were obtained from the Energy Infor-
mation Administration and were converted to real values using the Consumer Price Index
(CPI) from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Nominal annual GDP from 1954 to 2004 was ob-
sample includes IL, KS, MI, NE, NM, NY, NC, PE, and VA, which were not available for their study.
12These errors are sometimes apparent because a VIN will include a letter not allowable or are an incorrect
length. As shown in appendix tables A2 and A3, vehicles with unusable VINs are more prevalent for the
earliest years of data and improve with time.
10


===== [PAGE 12] =====

tained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. In our counterfactual simulations, we project
fatality rates by state based on ﬂeet characteristics from the National Household Trans-
portation Survey (NHTS) linked to our vehicle data. This projection also uses county-level
data on population and total fatalities. Population data comes from the U.S. Census via
the National Cancer Institute that adjusts for some known issues such as population shifts
between census waves due to natural disasters. County-level fatalities are from the Fatality
Analysis Reporting System (FARS) maintained by the NHTSA. Unlike our police-reported
data, FARS only records fatal crashes but exists for all counties nationwide.
4
Dispersion Methodology
4.1
Motivation
Our empirical strategy is motivated by the concern that the true risk of increasing the
stringency of CAFE depends on changing not only the mean but also the dispersion of
vehicle weight. We employ an unconditional quantile regression technique used for studying
wage dispersion developed by Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo (2009). This technique, known as
Recentered Inﬂuence Function (RIF) regression, is ideal for our setting where CAFE can be
satisﬁed through several channels, including lowering the weight of some vehicles.
The eﬀect of a policy on dispersion can either be summarized using a statistic of the
distribution or in a disaggregated fashion by examining individual quantiles. Common sum-
mary measures of dispersion include the Gini coeﬃcient (Borenstein and Rose, 1994), vari-
ance (Dahlby and West, 1986), coeﬃcient of variation (Pratt, Wise, and Zeckhauser, 1979;
Sorensen, 2000; Lach, 2002), and range (Sorensen, 2000). Although RIF regression can be
run on any statistic of a distribution, we focus on quantiles, which allow us to examine how
automakers are adjusting the entire weight distribution.
Regression techniques that move beyond the mean were advanced by Koenker and Bas-
sett (1978) with the development of conditional quantile regression. But unlike the mean,
11


===== [PAGE 13] =====

one cannot use the law of iterated expectations to move from the conditional to the un-
conditional estimates for quantiles.13 In some cases the researcher may be interested in the
eﬀect of a treatment on the τ-quantile conditional on covariates; in other cases the inability
to interpret the coeﬃcients as unconditional quantiles may be problematic.14 The method
developed by Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo (2009) is ideally suited to our question because
we wish to control for variables that are known to aﬀect automaker decisions but ultimately
want to know how CAFE aﬀects an arbitrary unconditional quantile τ of the equilibrium
weight distribution for the ﬂeet.15 Other approaches, such as conditional quantile regression,
or kernel-weighted ordinary least squares, would improperly characterize how the full distri-
bution of the ﬂeet changes. Appendix B provides an illustrative example to demonstrates
the value of unconditional quantile regression for our research question.
RIF regression makes use of an inﬂuence function (IF), which represents the inﬂuence of
adding an inﬁnitesimally small amount of contamination at point y to a distribution FY on
a distributional statistic ν. Examples of ν include the τth quantile, the mean, the variance,
and the Gini coeﬃcient. As ﬁrst shown in Hampel (1974), the inﬂuence function is formally
deﬁned as IF(y; ν, F) = limϵ→0(ν(Fϵ) −ν(F))/ϵ, where Fϵ(y) = (1 −ϵ)F + ϵδy, 0 ≤ϵ ≤1,
and δy is a distribution that puts all mass at the value of y.
To construct the RIF, the statistic of interest is then added back to the IF:
RIF(y; ν, FY ) = ν(FY ) + IF(y; ν, FY ).
(1)
13The linearity of the mean allows for equivalence between the conditional mean E(Y |X) = Xβ and the
unconditional mean E(Y ) = E(X)β, but this does not hold for a nonlinear statistic.
14As an example, it is possible that a treatment causes a large down-weighting at the 10th quantile of the
products produced by only one automaker (the quantile conditional on the automaker), but that particular
automaker may contribute very few vehicles to the 10th quantile of the total population, implying that the
conditional quantile is very diﬀerent than the unconditional quantile.
15It is also possible to recover the unconditional values by calculating every conditional quantile using
the approach of Machado and Mata (2005); however, the method developed by Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo
(2009) is much less computationally burdensome.
12


===== [PAGE 14] =====

For the speciﬁc case of the τth-quantile (qτ), we have
RIF(y; qτ) = qτ + τ −1(y ≤qτ)
fY (qτ)
(2)
where fY is the marginal density function of Y and 1(·) is an indicator function taking the
value of 1 if the condition holds.
Assuming that the explanatory variables, X, enter linearly, this allows for an OLS re-
gression of Y transformed by the RIF on X
E[RIF(Y ; ν)|X] = Xβν
(3)
where βν is the eﬀect of X on the distributional statistic ν, which in our case is the τth-
unconditional quantile.16
4.2
Model Speciﬁcation
For our initial analysis we focus on the impact of CAFE standards on the weight of
domestic cars, which made up the vast majority of the ﬂeet at the inception of CAFE.
We model the τ-quantile of vehicle weight, wt, as:
E[RIF(wtf,i,t; qτ)|Sf,t−1, Zf,i,t−1] = βτSf,t−1 + Z′
f,i,t−1γτ.
(4)
Here, f refers to a ﬁrm-ﬂeet combination, i a trim, and t a model year. S is a measure
of CAFE stringency. Z is a matrix of other controls. In Z we include time trends, lagged
gasoline prices, and lagged GDP. We omit variables such as fuel economy and horsepower
because we are interested in understanding the inﬂuence of CAFE on vehicle weight allowing
for changes in these other attributes. After all, the primary reason for down-weighting is to
16In the case of the the quantile, the density function fY in the RIF must be estimated and the standard
errors adjusted by bootstrapping.
In the case of other statistics, such as the variance, the RIF is not
estimated.
13


===== [PAGE 15] =====

improve fuel economy. Bootstrapped standard errors are computed using 200 replications.
To estimate the eﬀect of CAFE standards on the decisions of domestic automakers we
need a measure of CAFE stringency on each automaker’s ﬂeet in each year. Ideally we would
have a measure of stringency year-by-year, for each automaker, and each ﬂeet. Anderson and
Sallee (2011) are able to measure this stringency using a loophole in the CAFE regulation,
but unfortunately this loophole only lasted for several years. In lieu of such a measure, prior
work has generally used the CAFE level itself (Crandall and Graham, 1989; Ahmad and
Greene, 2005; Knittel, 2011) or the diﬀerence between the CAFE level and a counterfactual
average fuel economy without CAFE. Developing this counterfactual has involved a range
of assumptions, with some researchers using cross-sectional variation in the pre-CAFE level
(Klier and Linn, 2016), others introducing some structural assumptions by predicting a
counterfactual using a reduced form regression (Small and Van Dender, 2007), and others
using a full structural estimation (Klier and Linn, 2012; Jacobsen, 2013b,a).
While using only the CAFE level and omitting the counterfactual level of fuel economy
is a transparent approach using exogenous variation, there are two drawbacks to the use
of this method. The ﬁrst is that ﬁrms had quite diﬀerent average ﬂeet fuel economy levels
before the policy, so it is a relatively poor measure of stringency. The second arises because
our ultimate goal is to set the stringency equal to zero and simulate fatalities without CAFE
standards. In the absence of CAFE, the average fuel economy of vehicles is not zero but is
determined by factors such as fuel prices, GDP, and technology trends.
Because of these concerns we develop a counterfactual fuel economy level using an ap-
proach most similar to Small and Van Dender (2007). We deﬁne our measure of stringency
as:
Sf,t−1 = l(CAFEt−1) −l(
\
MPGf,t−1)
(5)
where l(
\
MPGf,t−1) is the log of the level of fuel economy for ﬁrm f in the absence of CAFE.
We predict the time path of fuel economy for each ﬁrm’s ﬂeet l(
\
MPGf,t−1) by ﬁrst estimating
a reduced-form equation explaining the fuel economy of vehicles produced between 1952 and
14


===== [PAGE 16] =====

1977. Explanatory variables for fuel economy include gasoline price, GDP, and a time trend.17
We then use these estimated coeﬃcients to predict fuel economy in the absence of CAFE for
the period after 1978. The primary beneﬁt of this measure is that, although the variation
is still largely driven by the imposed CAFE schedule, it acknowledges that ﬁrms are not
starting from identical places and allows for sensible counterfactual simulations by setting
this measure of stringency to zero.
Because vehicles are only redesigned every few years, the most relevant measure of strin-
gency for a given model year will be based on the stringency in prior years as well as
anticipated future levels. For this reason we average the stringency measure over the three
proceeding years, the current year, and one future year, but we also examine the eﬀect using
only the prior year of stringency as a robustness check.
There are some shortcomings to capturing stringency using this method.18 The ﬁrst is
that the variation identifying the coeﬃcient on stringency largely comes from the increase in
the CAFE standard between 1978 and 1990. The response of automakers may be diﬀerent
today. A related concern is that our prediction of counterfactual fuel economy is less reliable
over time. The automobile market is extremely dynamic with constant technological change.
Therefore we stress that our estimates and simulation results are most valid in examining
the original CAFE standards and caution should be used in assuming that similar dynamics
will prevail under the new standards. We nevertheless believe our results are of ﬁrst order
importance because criticism of the CAFE standard’s eﬀect on fatalities has largely been
based on the lessons learned during this early time period. Evidence from this early period
generated a reluctance to increase the standard and informed the decision to shift to a
footprint-based standard to prevent the decreases in vehicle size that happened during that
time.
17We also examine the inclusion of additional covariates for this prediction in appendix table A6.
18In the appendix we also examine the CAFE credit balance of the ﬁrms. See appendix table A7. Where
ﬂuctuations in the credit balance of a ﬁrm are due to unanticipated shocks, ﬁrms will face unanticipated
changes to stringency that are plausibly exogenous. However, this variation is so limited that the eﬀects,
while generally consistent with our preferred results, are imprecisely estimated.
15


===== [PAGE 17] =====

Another concern is that the choice of explanatory variables in predicting l(
\
MPGf,t−1)
may seem somewhat arbitrary. Additionally one may be concerned that the measure, Sf,t−1,
is not capturing stringency but rather is capturing the eﬀect of the variables included in
creating the prediction, which are likely to inﬂuence both weight and fuel economy. For
example, it may be the case that the stringency measure is in part capturing the direct eﬀect
of gasoline prices and GDP (note that we also make sure to include these covariates in our
weight regressions).
We address these concerns in several ways. We examine the robustness of our stringency
measure to these included regressors. We also examine the results using the CAFE level
as our measure of stringency. Using only the variation imposed by the policy removes any
concerns related to the prediction of l(
\
MPGf,t−1) but does not allow for the counterfactual
simulation as noted earlier. Nevertheless to the extent that this variation in the CAFE level
drives our estimates, it suggests that our decisions about how how to develop l(
\
MPGf,t−1)
do not overly inﬂuence our estimates. Although no measure of stringency provides a ‘silver
bullet’ for identiﬁcation, we argue that the measure chosen is the most defensible and, based
on robustness checks, its weaknesses are unlikely to be driving the results.
In a second set of regressions we examine the competitive eﬀects of CAFE on the un-
constrained ﬁrms. In particular, we hypothesize that the Asian automakers may oﬀset the
weight changes that CAFE may induce in the domestic ﬁrms. For this analysis we develop
a composite measure of stringency on the domestic ﬁrms by sales-weighted averaging of the
measure across the domestic ﬁrms.
5
Results
5.1
Empirical Results
This section reports estimates of the eﬀects of CAFE on the quantiles of vehicle weight
for domestic cars and trucks, and Asian cars. Because presenting point estimates for 100
16


===== [PAGE 18] =====

quantiles is not feasible, we ﬁrst present estimated results for the mean and a few key
quantiles on the domestic car sample. We then we use a graphical approach that plots all
coeﬃcients for various robustness tests and estimates using other ﬂeets.
5.1.1
Results for the Mean and Key Quantiles
Table 2 presents our main results for the mean and ﬁve key quantiles. Panel A displays
our estimates of the eﬀect of our preferred stringency measure on weight. The OLS regression
shows that a 10% increase in the standard will reduce the mean vehicle weight by 2.99%.
This implies that a 1 MPG increase in the standard will reduce mean vehicle weight by 32
lbs. A decrease in the mean vehicle weight does not reveal where in the product space the
down-weighting occurred or if it is associated with a compression or dispersion of vehicle
weight on the road.
Columns 2 through 6 present estimates from RIF regressions on the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th
and 90th quantile. These regressions reveal that the source of the down-weighting observed in
the mean was concentrated among already low-weight vehicles. We see the largest decreases
in weight were at the 25th quantile where a 1 MPG increase in the standard would result
in a 51.9 pound decrease on a vehicle weighting roughly 2,500 lbs. The eﬀects for higher
weight vehicles are closer to 30 lbs, a much smaller decrease. These point estimates suggest
that for much of the domestic ﬂeet distribution, CAFE generates dispersion in vehicle weight
whereby already low weight vehicles are down-weighted faster than heavier ones.
Panel B presents results using only the log of the CAFE level as the stringency measure.
There are a few key diﬀerences in the results. While the magnitudes are often similar, the
largest eﬀects are concentrated in the center of the distribution with the median experiencing
a decrease in vehicle weight of 67.8 lbs for a 1 MPG increase in the standard. This measure
suggests slightly more compression may occur for lower-weight vehicles, but that CAFE
continues to cause dispersion across much of the product space. These results are informative
but are limited to only a few coeﬃcients, while a graphical approach provides a more complete
17


===== [PAGE 19] =====

picture.
5.1.2
Graphical Display of Full Coeﬃcient Estimates
Table 3 plots the coeﬃcients and 95% conﬁdence intervals for several ﬂeets of vehicles.19
For ease of interpretation and comparison across ﬂeets, the x-axis plots the weight corre-
sponding to the quantiles.
The ﬁgure in row 1 plots the estimates for all quantiles from our preferred speciﬁcation
for the domestic car ﬂeet, including those from Panel A of Table 2. Compression of the
distribution occurs when the line connecting the coeﬃcients takes on a negative slope, while
dispersion is characterized by a positive slope. As suggested in Table 2, the point estimates
here indicate that some compression occurred for low weight vehicles but that dispersion
occurred over most of the product space.
Row 2 replaces our preferred measure of stringency with the log of the CAFE standard, as
in Panel B of Table 2. These results suggest that a somewhat larger part of the distribution
experienced compression than with our preferred measure, but that dispersion continues to
occur from the median up to the heaviest cars produced by US ﬁrms.
In our discussion of the stringency measure we noted that ﬁrms likely consider several
years of stringency when making design decisions but it is also possible that ﬁrms mostly
react to stringency in the prior year. Row 3 shows that our results change only minimally
when we examine the stingency measure based only on the prior year.
Row 4 examines quantiles based on the sales of vehicles sold at the model-level, rather
than trims produced. This approach greatly reduces the sample size. Although the point
estimates are consistent with our previous results in that they continue to slope upward, the
results are imprecisely estimated.
19Because quantile techniques do not perform well at the edges of the distribution as shown with a Monte
Carlo simulation in the appendix, we omit the top and bottom 3 quantiles from all graphs. At the ends,
the plotted points are further apart as fewer vehicles are produced in this product space and the distance
between quantiles is larger. In the middle of the density, where more vehicles are produced, the points are
closer together.
18


===== [PAGE 20] =====

Estimates for the domestic light-truck ﬂeet are presented in row 5. We see the largest
down-weighting for the lightest vehicles, and some evidence that up-weighting may occur for
the heaviest vehicles. In the appendix, we consider the robustness of our truck ﬂeet results
and ﬁnd that down-weighting of low-weight vehicles is consistent across all speciﬁcations
but up-weighting of the heaviest vehicles is more fragile. Nevertheless, there are several
reasons that the results for the heaviest light-duty trucks may diﬀer from that of heavy
cars. Prior to 1992 ﬁrms could choose to satisfy separate standards for 2WD and 4WD
vehicles. One way to comply with the standards was to redesign smaller 2WD models into
larger, and heavier, 4WD models that faced a lower standard. Another possible reason for
the diﬀerence between cars and light-duty trucks is the presence of unregulated heavy-duty
trucks. Because vehicles over 8,500 GVWR are not regulated by CAFE, several common
heavy duty trucks are unregulated, including the Ford F-250, Chevrolet Silverado 2500HD,
GMC Sierra 2500, and Dodge Ram 2500. The presence of these unregulated substitutes may
create diﬀerent incentives for ﬁrms resulting in a diﬀerent response to the regulation than
found in the car segment.20 Nevertheless, the results for the domestic truck ﬂeet indicate
that increased dispersion occurred.
Overall the data provide evidence that the use of down-weighting by ﬁrms was not uniform
across the weight distribution and that increased dispersion occurred for much of the domes-
tic ﬂeet. We view the result that ﬁrms tended to pursue down-weighting on already lighter-
weight vehicles as economically plausible, for lighter-weight vehicles might be expected to be
sold more price-sensitive customers who are less willing to pay for new technology but are
accepting of lighter vehicles.
20Our heaviest quantile is signiﬁcantly less than 8,500 lbs because our data are for curb weight, not
GVWR, which is the maximum allowable weight in the vehicle.
19


===== [PAGE 21] =====

5.1.3
Competitive Eﬀects
To examine the eﬀect of the standards on the Asian car segment we begin with the same
speciﬁcation as above using the predicted fuel economy measure of stringency for each ﬁrm.21
These estimates are presented in Row 6 of Table 3. What is immediately apparent from the
ﬁgure is that these ﬁrms seem to react very little to a tightening of ‘own-ﬁrm’ stringency.
The marginal eﬀects implied by these coeﬃcients are also small compared with those of the
domestic ﬁrms, usually less than 3 lbs. A minimal response makes economic sense because
the vehicles of these ﬁrms are already suﬃciently fuel-eﬃcient that these ﬁrms did not face
a binding standard.
CAFE may still have implications for these ﬁrms. Row 7 examines the possibility that in-
creased stringency on the domestic manufacturers allows the Asian manufacturers to increase
weight and move into a product space previously occupied by domestic ﬁrms. We replace
‘own-ﬁrm’ stringency with the sales-weighted average stringency of the domestic ﬁrms. This
ﬁgure shows that as the stringency on domestic ﬁrms is increased, Asian ﬁrms will increase
the weight of their lighter vehicles, possibly to take advantage of the demand for a type of
vehicle that is no longer provided by domestic ﬁrms. The precision of these regressions is
lower than those for the domestic ﬁrms because the stringency measure is no longer ﬁrm-
speciﬁc, but many coeﬃcients are statistically signiﬁcant and positive. These results suggest
that the Asian ﬁrms may be capitalizing on the down-weighting by domestic ﬁrms, which
could partially oﬀset the increased dispersion due to responses by domestic automakers.
21The only manufacturers included in this analysis are Mazda and Honda, which have suﬃcient pre-CAFE
observations from which to generate these predicted fuel economy levels. We also lack data during this time
period for the European ﬁrms and thus we cannot examine European ﬁrms using this stringency measure.
Estimates using alternative stringency measures are presented in the appendix.
20


===== [PAGE 22] =====

6
Simulation
6.1
Overview
Our results suggest that CAFE standards increased dispersion for a substantial portion
of the vehicles on the road. But we cannot conclude from this that CAFE increased fatalities
due to two potentially mitigating factors: the change in mean vehicle weight and the sorting
of vehicles by location. The mean weight in accidents would be expected have eﬀects inde-
pendent of weight dispersion, following the arms-race metaphor. Similarly, if small vehicles
sort to cities, they may rarely encounter the large trucks often found in rural areas. In this
section, we examine the net fatalities accounting for all of these factors.
To model fatalities, we use an approach closely following Anderson and Auﬀhammer
(2014), who ﬁnd that increased dispersion of vehicle weights increases accident fatalities.
Their results also suggest that a lower average vehicle weight might decrease fatalities, but
this result is not statistically signiﬁcant from zero. We expand upon their results by adding
further states to the analysis, using a consistent framework that is amenable to counterfactual
simulation, and performing extensive robustness checks.
To brieﬂy summarize, we consider a set of ¯N accidents involving three or fewer vehicles
indexed by i.22 Let wt be a vector of vehicle weights, µi(wt) be the mean weight of vehicles
in the crash, and σi(wt) a measure of dispersion where σi = 0 for 1-vehicle crashes. Let the
probability of a fatality be deﬁned by
fi(wt) = f(µi(wt), σi(wt), V, D, T)
(6)
where V are other characteristics of the vehicles involved23, D are driver characteristics
22As we document below, most crashes involve 3 or fewer vehicles and those with more have relatively
complicated dynamics.
23It is possible that many vehicle attributes are a function of vehicle weight but one important attribute
for fatalities is the size, or footprint, of the vehicle measured as length times the width of the wheelbase.
Prior to the current footprint-based standard, ﬁrms tended to change footprint in tandem with vehicle weight
(Wenzel, 2013). In appendix Table A22 we consider the implications of undoing footprint changes to vehicles.
21


===== [PAGE 23] =====

or behaviors, and T are time or vehicle model year controls. Appendix F contains a detailed
discussion of the accident fatality estimation, including the exact model speciﬁcations, and
the full results.
When a fuel economy standard is implemented, automakers change vehicle weights to c
wt.
CAFE may aﬀect accidents through many channels. For example, more eﬃcient vehicles cost
less per mile to drive, so consumers will drive more (the rebound eﬀect), which generates
additional fatalities (Gillingham, Rapson, and Wagner, 2015). Alternatively, CAFE provides
an incentive for automakers to use a light truck chassis, arguably even giving rise to the SUV
class, which has diﬀerent crash risks than large cars. We restrict our analysis to asking if
the weight changes caused by CAFE caused crashes to become more fatal, so we preserve
¯N, V , and D. We also omit any crashes involving pedestrians, motorcycles, bicycles, heavy-
duty trucks and crashes involving more than three vehicles as these crashes, as noted in the
summary statistics.24 We discuss these and other potentially omitted factors in more detail
in section 6.4.
Our simulation proceeds in several steps. First, we use our police-reported accident data
to estimate fi(wt). We perform this estimation separately for 1-, 2-, and 3-vehicle accidents
as is discussed in Appendix F. Next, we simulate fatalities in a counterfactual world by
removing CAFE and adjusting the vehicle weight according to our RIF estimates from section
5 to generate counterfactual weights c
wt. Speciﬁcally, we adjust by the estimated treatment
eﬀect for each quantile of the equilibrium weight distribution to generate the counterfactual
equilibrium weight distribution without CAFE. We perform this analysis for the domestic
car and truck ﬂeet, and in a second simulation for all ﬂeets, domestic and foreign. We then
apply the new counterfactual vehicle weights to the existing accidents in the SDS data and
the accident estimation results in order to estimate fatalities bfi = f(µi(c
wt), σi(c
wt), V, D).
Finally we consider how these results might extend to the entire United States. States
24Ballesteros, Dischinger, and Langenberg (2004) study the eﬀect of vehicle weight on pedestrian and bi-
cycle accidents and ﬁnd that heavier vehicles are more deadly to these agents but suggest that the correlation
may be due to design elements of the front of the vehicle and hood.
22


===== [PAGE 24] =====

not represented in the SDS crash data diﬀer along some key dimensions. Most importantly,
states in the West and South have more Asian vehicles and are under-represented in the SDS
data. To scale our results up and account for heterogeneity and sorting of the ﬂeet, we extend
our predictions using imputation. To impute fatalities, we calculate the percent change in
fatalities for each county in our SDS data, pc = P
i∈c bfi/ P ¯
N
i∈c fi.25 We then regress the
percent changes for observed SDS counties on county and state characteristics and predict
the percent change in fatalities in all counties. Finally, these percent changes are multiplied
by observed fatalities by county nationwide from the FARS dataset.
6.2
Summary of the Eﬀect of Vehicle Weight on Fatalities
Our accident fatality results (in Appendix F) conﬁrm the results in Anderson and
Auﬀhammer (2014): increased dispersion increases fatalities and decreased mean weight
decreases fatalities. These two results together suggest that down-weighting low-weight ve-
hicles will both lower the total weight, reducing fatalities, and increase dispersion, increasing
fatalities. The net eﬀect on fatalities depends on the characteristics of the ﬂeet and the eﬀect
of CAFE on the full weight distribution.
There is a clear physical explanation for the positive relationship between weight and
fatalities. Larger vehicles carry more kinetic energy. This places higher demands on braking
to stop a vehicle, and in the event of a crash, increases the amount of energy the vehicle
structure needs to absorb (Wenzel, 2013).
Thus, it is only when a vehicle encounters a
movable object does weight provide a protective eﬀect. For such crashes, a heavier vehicle is
likely to displace the smaller vehicle or movable object, reducing the deceleration experienced
by an occupant.
A ﬁnal useful result is that vehicles with a larger footprint have lower fatalities. This
again corresponds with the engineering safety literature (Wenzel, 2013).
25We include all fatalities, not only those for 1-, 2-, and 3-vehicle accidents, in the denominator of this
percent change calculation since FARS fatality counts are not limited to crashes involving 3 or fewer vehicles.
23


===== [PAGE 25] =====

6.3
Simulation Results
To simulate the eﬀect of removing CAFE, we ﬁrst create a counterfactual ﬂeet weight
distribution by using the RIF estimates from section 5 to adjust the weights of vehicles.26
Then we calculate the percent change in fatalities for the calendar year 2005 to illustrate
the eﬀects.27 Because this is roughly two decades after the the largest changes in CAFE
standards, these results for 2005 can best be thought of as ‘steady state’ results in the sense
that the full ﬂeet has been adjusted by CAFE by this point. We note that the transition
to this steady state—when only the newer vehicles in the ﬂeet have been aﬀected by CAFE
standards—may have diﬀerent eﬀects on fatalities.
Table 4 shows the results of these simulations. Panel A shows these eﬀects on the domestic
ﬂeet for the states in our SDS sample. The simulation indicates that removing CAFE would
have resulted in 171 additional fatalities. In other words, CAFE saved lives. This result
can largely be attributed to 1-vehicle accidents: down-weighting reduced 1-vehicle accident
fatalities by 141 lives. Obviously 1-vehicle accidents are only aﬀected by the down-weighting
and not dispersion. The additional dispersion increased fatalities for multi-vehicle accidents,
but this eﬀect appears to be oﬀset by the lower mean vehicle weight in those accidents.
One important eﬀect noted in section 5 is that the Asian automakers tended to up-
weight their vehicles. Panel B considers weight changes for the entire light duty vehicle ﬂeet,
including both domestic and foreign manufacturers. We see that the up-weighting by the
Asian automakers largely oﬀsets the changes in mean weight across all categories of accident.
At the same time, the up-weighting reduces dispersion, saving a considerable number of lives
26To calculate the weight of vehicles in the absence of CAFE we multiply the estimated coeﬃcient for a
vehicle’s weight quantile by the stringency in the model year and the weight of the vehicle. This gives the
total weight change induced by CAFE, which is then added back to the vehicle weight for a counterfactual
vehicle weight. For ﬂeets that are a small share of the market, such as Asian light trucks or European vehicles
we use estimates from those ﬂeets that are presented in Appendix Table A15.
27We also reweight the observations to match the frequency in the initial data. If a given fraction of vehicles
are missing information, this will eliminate more multi-vehicle accidents than single vehicle accidents. We
reweight each category of crash (1,2 or 3-vehicle) to match the number of crashes present in each category
in the initial SDS accident ﬁles before deletions. Although the simulation is for the set of accidents in 2005,
it sets stringency of CAFE to zero for all years current and past.
24


===== [PAGE 26] =====

for multi-vehicle crashes. On net, this scenario indicates that CAFE saved 171 lives, due to
the eﬀect of decreased dispersion dominating.
Panel C extends the analysis nationally for only the domestic ﬂeet. The county and state
characteristics used for the imputation include county-level population and annual traﬃc
fatalities, state level average vehicle weight, age, share light truck, share US and Asian
manufactured vehicles, and interactions between county-level population and fatalities with
fraction US and Asian.28 As expected, the results are larger in magnitude than the eﬀects
in Panel A since a larger geographic area is covered. The results indicate that CAFE saved
439 lives.
Panel D extends the analysis nationally for the entire light-duty vehicle ﬂeet. The ag-
gregate results largely align with other simulations and indicate that 393 lives were saved
nationally. There are however some interesting diﬀerences visible in the decomposition. For
example, consider 1-vehicle accidents. In the SDS states CAFE saved 20 lives (Panel B),
while nationally CAFE generated nearly 21 additional fatalities (Panel D). This diﬀerence
stems from diﬀerences in the vehicle ﬂeet between the SDS states and the nation. In partic-
ular, outside of the SDS states (especially on the West Coast) there are many more vehicles
from Asian automakers. CAFE led to these vehicles being up-weighted, which generated
more deadly 1-vehicle crashes. There are even larger eﬀects for multi-vehicle accidents than
1-vehicle accidents. For 2-car and 3-car accidents, the change in dispersion due to CAFE led
to fewer deaths, and in fact, this eﬀect overwhelms the increased deaths due to changing of
the mean weight.29
One of the primary beneﬁts of our county-by-county simulations is that it captures the
sorting of vehicles by location, which can amplify, mute, or even reverse the patterns that
emerge from the RIF-regressions. Automarkers are required to meet CAFE at a national
level, which can lead to signiﬁcant local heterogeneity in the eﬀect of CAFE. Given sorting,
28See Appendix Table 20 for a full listing of the controls.
29In appendix table A22 we consider alternative scenarios where footprint is adjusted along with vehicle
weight and the eﬀects in calendar year 1995 when the ﬂeet was somewhat diﬀerent than 2005. Across all
scenarios CAFE saves lives.
25


===== [PAGE 27] =====

the durability of vehicles, and the interactions between the car and light truck ﬂeet, nearly
any eﬀect is possible at the county level.
We illustrate the eﬀects in our simulation in
Figure 2. Panels A and B show our results for the the predicted changes in fatalities when
CAFE is removed for the observed accidents in our SDS dataset. Most counties saw fewer
fatalities, but some experienced more. In panel B, for example, Cook County, IL is better oﬀ
because of CAFE since the policy saved 17 lives. In Queens County, NY CAFE generated
an additional 0.1 fatalities. Panels C and D extend these values nationally, and again there
is considerable heterogeneity. Consider some examples from panel D that are outside of the
SDS states. In Maricopa County, AZ, which contains Phoenix, CAFE saved nearly 10 lives,
while in Los Angeles County, CA it generated an additional 26 fatalities. These results are
primarily driven by the market share of domestic automakers, which varies greatly across
the country.30
6.4
Discussion
Our simulation methodology has several advantages. The ﬁrst advantage is that unlike
randomly drawing vehicles to crash at a national level, we account for sorting over location.
This is important because small vehicles tend to sort into large cities and large vehicles into
suburban and rural areas, and we only want to interact vehicles that are likely to meet on the
road. Jacobsen (2013b) notes that drivers also sort by risk into vehicle class. For example,
minivans may attract low-risk drivers. By preserving accidents as observed, we preserve the
crash frequency by class. We also do not require assumptions about vehicle lifetime, miles
driven, and the population of vehicles on the road.
There are however some caveats to our results. First, we assume that drivers do not switch
their vehicle class in response to CAFE.31 To the extent that drivers buy larger vehicles in
30For example, Illinois has a ﬂeet that is 80% domestic and 18% Asian, while California has only 52%
domestic and 40% Asian.
31Our assumption is in eﬀect the mirror image of Jacobsen (2013b).
While he assumes that CAFE
preserves vehicle risk but shifts driver risk across vehicle classes, we assume that CAFE changes vehicle risk
but does not aﬀect driver risk.
26


===== [PAGE 28] =====

response to down-weighting, we will overestimate the number of lives saved. However, we do
not anticipate this dynamic to substantially alter our result. Klier and Linn (2012) suggest
that satisfying CAFE by using pricing to alter market shares across classes is an expensive
way to satisfy CAFE. Furthermore, we observe that ﬁrms ﬁnd it optimal to change the
weight of vehicles to comply with CAFE. While ﬁrms could use expensive technology that
improves fuel economy without sacriﬁcing attributes, the observed down-weighting suggests
that many consumers are more price-sensitive than attribute-sensitive and would be unlikely
to shift to larger, expensive vehicles.
Second, we recognize that drivers or ﬁrms may respond to changes in risk. Our regressions
including speed and seat belt covariates suggest these driver behaviors will have a relatively
minor eﬀect on our estimates. Nevertheless, it is possible that drivers of lighter vehicles
may drive more cautiously to avoid accidents with large vehicles (Peltzman, 1975).32 Prior
research has not found evidence of such behavior (Cohen and Einav, 2003). There may also
be safety adjustments by ﬁrms. Even though small cars may be safer for society, drivers may
be concerned that they are more dangerous for occupants. Firms may respond by putting
safety devices into at-risk vehicles to reassure drivers. If such behavior were the case for
either consumers or producers, it would suggest that we are underestimating the lives saved
by CAFE standards, reinforcing our result that CAFE standards saved lives.
Lastly, as noted earlier, CAFE may alter fatalities through channels besides vehicle weight
if the frequency of accidents changes as a result of more miles driven due to the rebound
eﬀect or changes to total vehicle sales. While these eﬀects are important, we see these as the
safety implications of the rebound eﬀect or of total vehicle sales and not the safety eﬀects of
changing vehicle weights. Both of these eﬀects could be analyzed separately.
32Although we ﬁnd that lower vehicle weight reduces total fatalities in multi-vehicle crashes, this is unlikely
to make these agents drive more carelessly because most of these beneﬁts are external and accrue to the
driver of the larger vehicle (White, 2004).
27


===== [PAGE 29] =====

7
Conclusions
Despite considerable resistance to CAFE standards based on concerns that down-
weighting leads to increased fatalities, we ﬁnd that CAFE likely saved lives. Ours is the
ﬁrst paper to empirically examine the distributional changes to vehicle weight generated by
CAFE. Although we ﬁnd increased dispersion in vehicle weight in several ﬂeets, these eﬀects
are oﬀset by the reduced dispersion due to upweighting of the Asian automaker ﬂeet and the
lower fatality risk from lowered mean vehicle weight. This demonstrates the importance of
separating the eﬀects due to a change in the mean from eﬀects due to a change in disper-
sion. The fatality risk of decreasing the weight of all vehicles by 50 lbs is diﬀerent than the
relative risk of a vehicle that is 50 lbs lighter in a multi-vehicle crash. It also demonstrates
how heterogeneous responses to regulation can inﬂuence the unintended consequences of the
regulation.
These results further speak to the potentially large welfare gains of a Pigouvian tax on
vehicle weight, but our dispersion results suggest that the optimal tax would have to be
contingent on the weight distribution of other vehicles on the road. While such an optimal
policy may be politically infeasible, we ﬁnd that CAFE has been providing safety cobeneﬁts
because it encourages down-weighting.
Using the Department of Transportation’s value
of a statistical life, at $9.4 million, the welfare beneﬁts of reduced fatalities, found in our
simulations to range between 393 and 439 lives nationally, are more than $3.5 billion annually.
Thus,
we
can
compare
the
monetized
value
of
our
results
to
the
esti-
mates the latest Regulatory Impact Analysis of CAFE/Greenhouse Gas Standards
(https://www.epa.gov/regulations-emissions-vehicles-and-engines).
We must be cautious
with extrapolating to the new footprint-based standards, but we can note that vehicles
with larger footprints have even lower fatalities, which has the potential to strengthen the
results. The projected compliance cost of the new standard is roughly $1.5 billion annually,
with an additional cost of $0.2 billion in driving related externalities.33 Some prior studies by
33These values are for the lifetime of model year 2011 vehicles. While diﬀerences may arise when summing
28


===== [PAGE 30] =====

economists have suggested higher compliance costs than those used by the EPA (Jacobsen,
2013a), while others have suggested lower costs (Anderson and Sallee, 2011).34 Based on
EPA’s estimate of the compliance cost or even a cost as high as $200 per vehicle annually,
our ﬁndings suggest that CAFE would pass a cost-beneﬁt test based on beneﬁts from re-
duced fatalities alone. This is particularly notable because the current EPA analysis does
not include beneﬁts or costs from fatalities, but relies heavily on myopic consumers realizing
large future fuel savings to pass a cost-beneﬁt test, which recent economic evidence brings
into question (Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer, 2013; Allcott and Wozny, 2014; Sallee, West,
and Fan, 2016). Our results suggest CAFE standards may have positive net beneﬁts even
without any undervaluation of fuel economy.
References
Ahmad, Sanjana and David Greene. 2005. “Eﬀect of Fuel Economy on Automobile Safety:
A Reexamination.” Transportation Research Record 1941:1–7.
Allcott, Hunt and Nathan Wozny. 2014. “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy
Paradox.” Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (5):779–795.
Anderson, Michael L and Maximilian Auﬀhammer. 2014. “Pounds that Kill: The External
Costs of Vehicle Weight.” The Review of Economic Studies 81 (2):535–571.
Anderson, Soren T and James M Sallee. 2011. “Using Loopholes to Reveal the Marginal Cost
of Regulation: The Case of Fuel-Economy Standards.” The American Economic Review
101 (4):1375–1409.
driving related external costs across all model years in one calendar year compared summing driving related
external costs across calendar years for one model of vehicle, the compliance costs occur only in the year of
production and will be the same under both cost calculations.
34For example, Anderson and Sallee (2011) estimate an upper bound of compliance costs of $55 per
vehicle. Estimates in Jacobsen (2013a) range from $52 to $438 per vehicle depending on the vehicle ﬂeet.
At $55 per vehicle and an illustrative 15 million vehicles sold, the compliance costs are less than $1 billion.
At $200 per vehicle, the compliance cots are $3 billion.
29


===== [PAGE 31] =====

Auﬀhammer, Maximilian and Ryan Kellogg. 2011. “Clearing the Air? The Eﬀects of Gasoline
Content Regulation on Air Quality.” The American Economic Review 101 (6):2687–2722.
Austin, David and Terry Dinan. 2005. “Clearing the Air: The Costs and Consequences
of Higher CAFE Standards and Increased Gasoline Taxes.” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 50 (3):562–582.
Ballesteros, Michael F, Patricia C Dischinger, and Patricia Langenberg. 2004. “Pedestrian
Injuries and Vehicle Type in Maryland, 1995–1999.”
Accident Analysis & Prevention
36 (1):73–81.
Bento, Antonio M, Lawrence H Goulder, Mark R Jacobsen, and Roger H Von Haefen. 2009.
“Distributional and Eﬃciency Impacts of Increased US Gasoline Taxes.” The American
Economic Review :667–699.
Borenstein, Severin and Nancy Rose. 1994. “Competition and Price Dispersion in the US
Airline Industry.” Journal of Political Economy 102 (4):653–83.
Busse, Meghan, Christopher Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013.
“Are Consumers
Myopic?
Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.”
American Economic Review
103 (1):220–256.
Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen Cropper, and Karen L Palmer. 2000. “Sulfur
Dioxide Control by Electric Utilities: What are the Gains from Trade?”
Journal of
Political Economy 108 (6):1292–1326.
Cohen, Alma and Liran Einav. 2003. “The Eﬀects of Mandatory Seat Belt Laws on Driving
Behavior and Traﬃc Fatalities.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (4):828–843.
Crandall, Robert W and John D Graham. 1989. “The Eﬀect of Fuel Economy Standards on
Automobile Safety.” Journal of Law and Economics 32 (1):97–118.
30


===== [PAGE 32] =====

Dahlby, Bev and Douglas S West. 1986.
“Price Dispersion in an Automobile Insurance
Market.” The Journal of Political Economy :418–438.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions
and the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica
64 (5):1001–1044.
Fortin, Nicole, Thomas Lemieux, and Sergio Firpo. 2009. “Unconditional Quantile Regres-
sion.” Econometrica 77 (3):953–973.
Gillingham, Kenneth, David Rapson, and Gernot Wagner. 2015. “The Rebound Eﬀect and
Energy Eﬃciency Policy.” Review of Environmental Economics & Policy 10 (1):68–88.
Hampel, Frank R. 1974. “The Inﬂuence Curve and its Role in Robust Estimation.” Journal
of the American Statistical Association 69 (346):383–393.
Ito, Koichiro and James M Sallee. 2014. “The Economics of Attribute-Based Regulation:
Theory and Evidence from Fuel-Economy Standards.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Jacobsen, Mark R. 2013a. “Evaluating US Fuel Economy Standards in a Model with Pro-
ducer and Household Heterogeneity.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
5 (2):148–187.
Jacobsen, Mark R. 2013b. “Fuel Economy and Safety: The Inﬂuences of Vehicle Class and
Driver Behavior.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (3):1–26.
Klier, Thomas and Joshua Linn. 2012. “New-vehicle Characteristics and the Cost of the Cor-
porate Average Fuel Economy standard.” The RAND Journal of Economics 43 (1):186–
213.
———. 2016. “Technological Change, Vehicle Characteristics and the Opportunity Costs of
Fuel Economy Standards.” Journal of Public Economics forthcoming.
31


===== [PAGE 33] =====

Knittel, Christopher R. 2011.
“Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-Oﬀs
and Technological Progress in the Automobile Sector.”
American Economic Review
2012 (101):3368–3399.
Koenker, Roger and Gilbert Bassett. 1978. “Regression Quantiles.” Econometrica :33–50.
Lach, Saul. 2002. “Existence and Persistence of Price Dispersion: An Empirical Analysis.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (3):433–444.
Li, Shanjun. 2012. “Traﬃc Safety and Vehicle Choice: Quantifying the Eﬀects of the Arms
Race on American Roads.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 27 (1):34–62.
Machado, Jos´e AF and Jos´e Mata. 2005. “Counterfactual Decomposition of Changes in Wage
Distributions Using Quantile Regression.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 20 (4):445–
465.
Noland, Robert B. 2004. “Motor Vehicle Fuel Eﬃciency and Traﬃc Fatalities.” The Energy
Journal :1–22.
Peltzman, Sam. 1975.
“The Eﬀects of Automobile Safety Regulation.”
The Journal of
Political Economy :677–725.
Pratt, John W, David A Wise, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1979. “Price Diﬀerences in Almost
Competitive Markets.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics :189–211.
Sallee, James, Sarah West, and Wei Fan. 2016. “Do Consumers Recognize the Value of Fuel
Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations.” Journal of
Public Economics 135:61–73.
Small, Kenneth A and Kurt Van Dender. 2007. “Fuel Eﬃciency and Motor Vehicle Travel:
The Declining Rebound Eﬀect.” The Energy Journal :25–51.
Sorensen, Alan T. 2000. “Equilibrium Price Dispersion in Retail Markets for Prescription
Drugs.” Journal of Political Economy 108 (4):833–850.
32


===== [PAGE 34] =====

Stavins, Robert N. 1998. “What Can We Learn from the Grand Policy Experiment? Lessons
from SO2 Allowance Trading.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12 (3):69–88.
Wenzel, Tom. 2013. “The Estimated Eﬀect of Mass or Footprint Reduction in Recent Light-
Duty Vehicles on US Societal Fatality Risk per Vehicle Mile Traveled.” Accident Analysis
& Prevention 59:267–276.
White, Michelle J. 2004. “The ‘Arms Race’ on American Roads: The Eﬀect of Sport Utility
Vehicles and Pickup Trucks on Traﬃc Safety.” Journal of Law and Economics 47 (2):333–
355.
33


===== [PAGE 35] =====

15
20
25
30
35
40
Standard
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Model Year
Passenger Cars
Light-duty Trucks
Figure 1: Historical Fuel Economy Standards (miles-per-gallon)
34


===== [PAGE 36] =====

Panel A
Panel B
(1,30]
(.1,1]
(.0001,.1]
(-.0001,.0001]
(-.1,-.0001]
(-1,-.1]
[-30,-1]
No data
(1,30]
(.1,1]
(.0001,.1]
(-.0001,.0001]
(-.1,-.0001]
(-1,-.1]
[-30,-1]
No data
SDS States
SDS States
Remove CAFE for Domestic Firms
Remove CAFE for All Firms
Panel C
Panel D
(1,30]
(.1,1]
(.0001,.1]
(-.0001,.0001]
(-.1,-.0001]
(-1,-.1]
[-30,-1]
No data
(1,30]
(.1,1]
(.0001,.1]
(-.0001,.0001]
(-.1,-.0001]
(-1,-.1]
[-30,-1]
No data
Impute Nationally
Impute Nationally
Remove CAFE for Domestic Firms
Remove CAFE for All Firms
Figure 2: Predicted Fatality Changes from Removing CAFE in 2005
35


===== [PAGE 37] =====

Trim Level
Years 1970-1974 1975-1977 1978-1979 1980-1984 1985-1989 1990-1994 1995-1999 2000-2004
All Vehicles
Mean
3755.2
3602.3
3294.3
3034.8
2962.7
3273.2
3573.8
4020.1
St.Dev.
(634.8)
(795.8)
(654.5)
(663.5)
(685.3)
(731.3)
(857.5)
(1065.6)
N
5803
3649
2857
5339
6680
7291
6741
9014
All Cars
Mean
3753.3
3600.6
3262.3
2952.6
2763.4
2977.4
3085.0
3226.9
St.Dev.
(634.0)
(802.1)
(640.6)
(624.8)
(533.8)
(544.1)
(543.5)
(513.0)
N
5608
3378
2611
4580
4870
4614
3515
3597
All Light
Mean
3811.2
3622.8
3633.6
3530.9
3498.8
3783.0
4106.5
4546.8
Trucks
St.Dev.
(658.2)
(714.7)
(704.1)
(674.3)
(756.7)
(731.9)
(818.9)
(1009.8)
N
195
271
246
759
1810
2677
3226
5417
Domestic
Mean
3792.7
3695.2
3394.0
3141.3
3085.8
3437.4
3802.9
4370.9
Vehicles
St.Dev.
(595.5)
(734.9)
(579.7)
(631.0)
(720.6)
(754.3)
(884.0)
(1114.1)
N
5641
3362
2553
4420
4496
4539
4288
5594
Ford
Mean
3779.5
3734.8
3437.7
3052.3
3222.9
3493.4
3921.8
4469.3
St.Dev.
(591.8)
(835.1)
(784.1)
(629.6)
(761.5)
(782.1)
(854.4)
(1214.4)
N
1564
689
448
1019
992
1265
1324
2168
GM
Mean
3888.3
3615.3
3394.0
3259.6
3137.0
3524.2
3814.6
4366.5
St.Dev.
(603.9)
(744.2)
(500.7)
(648.2)
(774.8)
(806.1)
(881.4)
(1075.4)
N
2240
1253
1127
1875
2071
2100
1970
2589
Chrysler
Mean
3779.3
3956.6
3543.5
2954.6
2913.0
3239.5
3574.4
4001.0
St.Dev.
(577.7)
(653.2)
(568.7)
(657.3)
(574.8)
(562.5)
(759.6)
(806.7)
N
1339
924
544
827
1259
1280
1119
1326
Asian
Mean
2217.9
2222.3
2200.7
2272.2
2594.6
2885.5
3036.9
3360.1
Vehicles
St.Dev.
(368.2)
(422.3)
(498.2)
(420.0)
(467.1)
(549.4)
(580.7)
(674.4)
N
90
130
168
512
1568
2077
1827
2335
European
Mean
2735.2
2756.2
2773.3
2837.6
3001.2
3361.8
3571.9
3631.4
Vehicles
St.Dev.
(652.1)
(731.0)
(673.0)
(580.6)
(539.3)
(608.7)
(618.4)
(577.9)
N
72
157
136
407
616
675
626
1085
Table 1: Summary Statistics for Vehicle Weight (in lbs.) by Year
36


===== [PAGE 38] =====

Panel A: Fuel Economy Regressionsa
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Regressand
OLS
Q10
Q25
Q50
Q75
Q90
P3
i=−1 St−i
5
-0.299***
-0.536***
-0.553***
-0.304***
-0.222***
-0.214***
(0.027)
(0.049)
(0.059)
(0.054)
(0.048)
(0.044)
l(Gasoline Pricet−1)
-0.284***
-0.338***
-0.555***
-0.422***
-0.164***
-0.114***
(0.014)
(0.023)
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.027)
(0.024)
l(GDPt−1)
-0.292***
0.175
-0.209
-0.105
-0.441**
-0.438**
(0.082)
(0.147)
(0.155)
(0.151)
(0.155)
(0.135)
Weight in Quantilec
3,023.4
2,280.0
2,582.0
3,001.0
3,429.0
3,803.0
Weight Change for 1MPGc
-32.8
-44.4
-51.9
-33.2
-27.7
-29.6
R-squared
0.132
0.064
0.109
0.126
0.073
0.048
N
15,021
15,021
15,021
15,021
15,021
15,021
Panel B: CAFE Level Regressionsb
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Regressand
OLS
Q10
Q25
Q50
Q75
Q90
l(CAFE)
-0.305***
-0.152
-0.436**
-0.624***
-0.341*
-0.183
(0.075)
(0.141)
(0.147)
(0.142)
(0.135)
(0.109)
l(Gasoline Pricet−1)
-0.132***
-0.192***
-0.314***
-0.166**
-0.013
-0.016
(0.028)
(0.050)
(0.056)
(0.055)
(0.051)
(0.041)
l(GDPt−1)
-0.183*
0.438***
0.014
-0.048
-0.379*
-0.355**
(0.082)
(0.123)
(0.152)
(0.170)
(0.155)
(0.132)
Weight in Quantilec
3,013.7
2,271.0
2,568.0
2,989.0
3,419.0
3,792.0
Weight Change for 1MPGc
-33.4
-12.6
-40.7
-67.8
-42.4
-25.2
R-squared
0.126
0.056
0.103
0.125
0.072
0.047
N
15,021
15,021
15,021
15,021
15,021
15,021
Notes: All regressions include a quadratic trend and automaker ﬁxed eﬀects. Bootstrap standard errors
in parentheses with * indicating signiﬁcance at 5%, ** at 1%, and *** at >1%.
a Predicted Fuel Economy Regressions use 1978 to 2005. To predict the fuel economy without CAFE for
a given ﬂeet (St−i) the harmonic mean fuel economy of the ﬂeet produced prior to CAFE is regressed on
a trend, the gasoline price, and GDP. These coeﬃcients are then used to predict the fuel economy level
after the introduction of the CAFE standard. This is done separately for each automaker and each ﬂeet
(cars vs. light trucks).
b CAFE Level Regressions use model years 1978 to 2005.
c Weight in pounds.
Table 2: Eﬀects for Domestic Cars
37


===== [PAGE 39] =====

Coeﬃcients
Segment
Model Years
Displayed Coeﬃcient
Sales Weighted
Domestic Firms
1
-1
0
1
2000
3000
4000
5000
Cars
1978-2005
P3
i=−1 St−i
5
No
2
-1
0
1
2000
3000
4000
5000
Cars
1978-2005
l(CAFELevelt)
No
3
-1
0
1
2000
3000
4000
5000
Cars
1978-2005
St−1
No
4
-1
0
1
2000
3000
4000
5000
Cars
1978-2005
P3
i=−1 St−i
5
Yes
5
-1
0
1
2000
3000
4000
5000
Trucks
1978-2005
P3
i=−1 St−i
5
No
Asian Firms
6
-1
0
1
2000
3000
4000
5000
Cars
1978-2005
Own
P3
i=−1 St−i
5
No
7
-1
0
1
2000
3000
4000
5000
Cars
1978-2005
Average US
P3
i=−1 St−i
5
No
Notes: All regressions include a quadratic trend and automaker ﬁxed eﬀects. Bootstrap standard errors are calculated using 200
repetitions. 95% conﬁdence intervals are indicated by dashed lines. To predict the fuel economy without CAFE for a given ﬂeet
(St−i) the harmonic mean fuel economy of the ﬂeet produced prior to CAFE is regressed on a trend, the gasoline price, and GDP.
These coeﬃcients are then used to predict the fuel economy level after the introduction of the CAFE standard.
This is done
separately for each automaker and each ﬂeet (cars vs. light trucks).
Table 3: Graphical Regression Results
38


===== [PAGE 40] =====

Panel A: SDS States, Remove CAFE for Domestic Firms
1-car
2-car
3-car
Total
Change Dispersion Only
0.0
-46.1
-6.3
-52.4
Change Mean Weight Only
141.3
61.6
20.5
223.5
Total Change
141.3
15.4
14.2
171.0
Panel B: SDS States, Remove CAFE for All Firms
1-car
2-car
3-car
Total
Change Dispersion Only
0.0
128.4
28.0
156.4
Change Mean Weight Only
20.4
-3.4
-2.0
15.0
Total Change
20.4
125.0
25.9
171.3
Panel C: Impute to National Level, Remove CAFE for Domestic Firmsa
1-car
2-car
3-car
Total
Change Dispersion Only
0.0
-100.0
-10.5
-110.4
Change Mean Weight Only
342.7
155.3
51.6
549.7
Total Change
342.7
55.4
41.1
439.2
Panel D: Impute to National Level, Remove CAFE for All Firmsa
1-car
2-car
3-car
Total
Change Dispersion Only
0.0
395.4
87.4
482.8
Change Mean Weight Only
-20.7
-49.7
-19.3
-89.7
Total Change
-20.7
345.7
68.1
393.1
Notes: Calculates change in fatalities if CAFE is removed and the stringency is set to zero. Positive
values indicate that CAFE saved lives in 2005.
a Because the states with SDS accident data tend to be Eastern and Midwest we impute a percent change
in fatality rate based on county population, total fatalities, and state level average vehicle weight, age,
share light truck, and share US and Asian manufacturer. This imputation tends to reduce lives saved
because western counties have low population density and have a larger share Asian manufacturer.
Table 4: Simulation of Fatalities without CAFE 2005
39
