

===== [PAGE 1] =====

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
QUID PRO QUO, KNOWLEDGE SPILLOVER, 
AND INDUSTRIAL QUALITY UPGRADING: 
EVIDENCE FROM THE CHINESE AUTO INDUSTRY
Jie Bai
Panle Jia Barwick
Shengmao Cao
Shanjun Li
Working Paper 27644
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27644
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2020, Revised November 2022
We thank David Atkin, Lauren Bergquist, Loren Brandt, Meghan Busse, Davin Chor, Kerem 
Cosa, Dave Donaldson, Jeffery Frankel, Asim Khwaja, Gabriel Kreindler, Gordon Hanson, James 
Harrigan, Hanwei Huang, Wolfgang Keller, Robert Lawrence, Ernest Liu, Benjamin Olken, 
Jessica Pan, Ivan Png, Yu Qin, Dani Rodrik, Meredith Startz, Heiwai Tang, Eric Verhoogen, 
Shaoda Wang, Shangjin Wei, Tom Wollmann, Daniel Xu, and seminar and conference 
participants at Baruch College, the Beijing International Trade and Investment Symposium, Bank 
of Canada–Tsinghua PBCSF–University of Toronto Conference on the Chinese Economy, China 
Economics Summer Institute, Columbia University, Georgetown University, George Washington 
University, Harvard Kennedy School, IGC-Stanford conference on firms, trade and development, 
Johns Hopkins University, Microsoft Economics, MIT, National University of Singapore, NBER 
Chinese Economy Workshop, NBER Industrial Organization Workshop, NBER Development/
BREAD (preconference), Stanford, trade seminar at Hong Kong Universities, University of 
Alberta, University of Toronto, University of Virginia, University of Zurich, UPenn China 
Seminar, US Census Bureau, World Bank Development Research Group, and Yale for helpful 
comments. We thank Ann Xie and Minghuang Zhang for generous data support and Luming 
Chen, Yikuan Ji, Yiding Ma, Binglin Wang, Yukun Wang and especially Youming Liu for 
excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Jie Bai, Panle Jia Barwick, Shengmao Cao, and Shanjun Li. All rights reserved. Short 
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission 
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.


===== [PAGE 2] =====

Quid Pro Quo, Knowledge Spillover, and Industrial Quality Upgrading: Evidence from the 
Chinese Auto Industry
Jie Bai, Panle Jia Barwick, Shengmao Cao, and Shanjun Li
NBER Working Paper No. 27644
August 2020, Revised November 2022
JEL No. F23,O14,O25
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the impact of FDI via quid pro quo (technology for market access) in facilitating
knowledge spillover and quality upgrades. Our context is the Chinese automobile industry, where
foreign automakers are required to set up joint ventures (the quid) with domestic automakers in return
for market access (the quo). Our identification strategy exploits a unique dataset of detailed vehicle
quality measures and relies on within-product variation across quality dimensions. We show that affiliated
domestic automakers tend to adopt the quality strengths of their joint venture partners, consistent with
learning and knowledge spillover. We rule out alternative explanations, such as endogenous joint venture
formation, geographic proximity, overlapping customer bases, brand image association, and patent
transfers. Additional analysis shows that worker flows and supplier networks mediate knowledge spillover.
Finally, using an equilibrium model for the auto industry, we show that knowledge spillover due to
ownership affiliation, in additional to any industry-wide knowledge spillover, improved the quality
of affiliated domestic models by 3.8-12.7% and raised their profits by 1.0-3.5% between 2007 and
2014.
Jie Bai
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jie_bai@hks.harvard.edu
Panle Jia Barwick
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Department of Economics
1180 Observatory Dr
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
panle.barwick@gmail.com
Shengmao Cao
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60201
United States
shengmao.cao@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Shanjun Li
Cornell University
405 Warren Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
SL2448@cornell.edu


===== [PAGE 3] =====

Quid Pro Quo, Knowledge Spillover, and Industrial Quality Upgrades:
Evidence from the Chinese Auto Industry
Jie Bai
Panle Jia Barwick
Shengmao Cao
Shanjun Li∗
November 14, 2022
Abstract
This paper studies the impact of FDI via quid pro quo (technology for market access) in
facilitating knowledge spillover and quality upgrades. Our context is the Chinese automobile
industry, where foreign automakers are required to set up joint ventures (the quid) with
domestic automakers in return for market access (the quo).
Our identiﬁcation strategy
exploits a unique dataset of detailed vehicle quality measures and relies on within-product
variation across quality dimensions. We show that aﬃliated domestic automakers tend to
adopt the quality strengths of their joint venture partners, consistent with learning and
knowledge spillover. We rule out alternative explanations, such as endogenous joint venture
formation, geographic proximity, overlapping customer bases, brand image association, and
patent transfers. Additional analysis shows that worker ﬂows and supplier networks mediate
knowledge spillover. Finally, using an equilibrium model for the auto industry, we show
that knowledge spillover due to ownership aﬃliation, in additional to any industry-wide
knowledge spillover, improved the quality of aﬃliated domestic models by 3.8-12.7% and
raised their proﬁts by 1.0-3.5% between 2007 and 2014.
Keywords: FDI, knowledge spillover, quality upgrade, joint venture
JEL classiﬁcation: F23, O14, O25
∗Contact: Bai: Harvard Kennedy School and NBER (email: jie bai@hks.harvard.edu); Barwick: Department
of Economics, University of Wisconsin-Madison and NBER (email: pbarwick@wisc.edu); Cao: Department of
Strategy, Kellogg School of Management (email: shengmao.cao@kellogg.northwestern.edu); Li: Dyson School of
Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University and NBER (email: sl2448@cornell.edu).
We thank
David Atkin, Lauren Bergquist, Loren Brandt, Meghan Busse, Davin Chor, Kerem Cosa, Dave Donaldson,
Jeﬀery Frankel, Asim Khwaja, Gabriel Kreindler, Gordon Hanson, James Harrigan, Hanwei Huang, Wolfgang
Keller, Robert Lawrence, Ernest Liu, Benjamin Olken, Jessica Pan, Ivan Png, Yu Qin, Dani Rodrik, Meredith
Startz, Heiwai Tang, Eric Verhoogen, Shaoda Wang, Shangjin Wei, Tom Wollmann, Daniel Xu, and seminar and
conference participants at Baruch College, the Beijing International Trade and Investment Symposium, Bank of
Canada–Tsinghua PBCSF–University of Toronto Conference on the Chinese Economy, China Economics Summer
Institute, Columbia University, Georgetown University, George Washington University, Harvard Kennedy School,
IGC-Stanford conference on ﬁrms, trade and development, Johns Hopkins University, Microsoft Economics, MIT,
National University of Singapore, NBER Chinese Economy Workshop, NBER Industrial Organization Workshop,
NBER Development/BREAD (preconference), Stanford, trade seminar at Hong Kong Universities, University of
Alberta, University of Toronto, University of Virginia, University of Zurich, UPenn China Seminar, US Census
Bureau, World Bank Development Research Group, and Yale for helpful comments. We thank Ann Xie and
Minghuang Zhang for generous data support and Luming Chen, Yikuan Ji, Yiding Ma, Binglin Wang, Yukun
Wang and especially Youming Liu for excellent research assistance. All errors are our own.


===== [PAGE 4] =====

1
Introduction
The past several decades have witnessed signiﬁcant liberalization among developing economies to for-
eign trade and investment, as advocated by international organizations (UNCTAD, 2018; World Bank,
2018).1 Nevertheless, for strategic reasons, emerging economies such as China, India, and Brazil con-
tinue to impose considerable restrictions on foreign direct investment (FDI) in certain sectors. One
such policy is quid pro quo (technology for market access), which requires multinational ﬁrms to form
joint ventures (JVs) with domestic ﬁrms, often with a strict cap on the share of foreign equity, in return
for access to the host country’s domestic market (Holmes, McGrattan, and Prescott, 2015).2 While
the joint venture requirement more directly exposes ﬁrms in developing countries to foreign technol-
ogy, multinational ﬁrms consider it a form of coerced technology transfer and a signiﬁcant barrier to
investing in developing countries. Quid pro quo lies at the forefront of the U.S.–China trade tensions,
and concern over this policy was a key stated justiﬁcation for the Trump administration’s decision to
impose tariﬀs on $50 billion worth of Chinese imports in 2018.3
Despite the policy relevance of quid pro quo and these recent controversies, little is known about
its beneﬁts to the host country over a policy of unrestricted FDI.4 The famous ﬁasco of the GM-
Toyota JV in the 1990s suggests learning need not materialize for hosting countries for reasons such
as limited absorptive capacity and cultural diﬀerences. The vast literature on FDI has paid relatively
scant attention to whether and how the form of FDI matters. In this paper, we attempt to ﬁll this
knowledge gap by examining the eﬀectiveness of the joint venture requirement under quid pro quo in
facilitating learnign and knowledge spillover from foreign to domestic ﬁrms. Unlike previous studies
that mostly rely on ﬁrm-level total factor productivity (TFP) as the outcome variable, we exploit a
rich set of product quality attributes that embody ﬁrms’ fundamental technological capabilities. These
quality measures allow us to look inside the black box of TFP and provide concrete evidence of learning
and knowledge spillover. In addition, a better understanding of industrial quality upgrades is valuable
in itself and relevant for both academics and policy makers in developing countries (Verhoogen, 2020).
1Restrictions on foreign investment and technology transfer were common in developing countries before the 1990s.
Economic and trade liberalization in the 1980s and 1990s brought about a more laissez-faire attitude toward foreign
investment and technology transfer, and many restrictions were removed during that period (Karabay, 2010).
2China imposes a 50% foreign ownership cap in 38 “restricted access” industries. Vietnam has a 49% foreign ownership
cap for all publicly listed companies. The Philippines has a 40% foreign ownership cap on telecommunication and utility
companies. In India and Brazil, foreign ownership was restricted in numerous key industries until recently.
3The Oﬃce of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) issued a report in 2018 on its investigation into China’s
policies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property, and innovation. Forced technology transfer
through foreign ownership restrictions is considered a key component of China’s technology transfer regime.
Source:
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/Section 301 FINAL.PDF.
4While it seems natural that joint ventures should facilitate learning and knowledge spillover, eﬀective learning may
not necessarily materialize. One example is New United Motor Manufacturing, Inc. (NUMMI), a joint venture between
GM and Toyota between 1984 and 2010. GM executives attempted to spread the Toyota Production System to its other
assembly plants in the US, but it proved largely unsuccessful after over two decades of joint ventures. A full story can be
found in 561: NUMMI (2015) - This American Life.
1


===== [PAGE 5] =====

Our context is the Chinese automobile industry, the largest in the world since 2009. Foreign au-
tomakers are required to set up joint ventures (the quid) with domestic automakers to produce and
sell cars in China (the quo). A ﬁxed cap of 50% is imposed on the foreign ownership share, and it is
binding in all cases. There are 23 joint ventures (e.g., BMW–Brilliance), 12 domestic automakers that
are aﬃliated with the joint ventures but have independent production (e.g., Brilliance Auto),5 and 7
domestic automakers with no joint venture aﬃliation (e.g., BYD).
The automobile industry is the paradigmatic industry for studying knowledge spillover and quality
upgrades given the multitude of technological and quality features embodied in the ﬁnal products. Our
primary dataset consists of rich quality measures along multiple dimensions of vehicle performance,
including both malfunction rates and driver experience ratings, for nearly the universe of car models
produced in China from 2001 to 2014.6 We map these granular quality data onto the entire ownership
network to trace knowledge ﬂow patterns. To examine potential channels of knowledge ﬂow, we lever-
age additional data sets on worker ﬂows among automakers, parts and components suppliers, patent
transfers, and auto assembly plant locations. To our knowledge, this represents one of the most com-
prehensive data of China’s automobile industry, spanning a period of unprecedented growth from its
near-nascence to being the world’s largest auto market.
We begin by documenting the quality catch-up among Chinese domestic automakers. Malfunction
rates of car models produced by domestic automakers fell by more than 75% from 2001 to 2014, demon-
strating impressive quality improvement. At the same time, the quality gap between domestic models
and JV models produced in China narrowed greatly: while the malfunction rate of domestic models
was 65% higher than that of JV models in 2001, by 2014, this gap had shrunk to 33%.
While many factors may explain the overall quality upgrading of the industry, including industry-
wide knowledge spillover from foreign automakers, we focus on the role of quid pro quo. The joint
venture requirement creates a set of domestic automakers that are aﬃliated with foreign automakers
through JVs. These domestic automakers are the primary beneﬁciaries of the policy, receiving direct
exposure to foreign technology.7 Therefore, to isolate the direct learning beneﬁt as a result of ownership
aﬃliation under quid pro quo, in addition to any industry-wide spillover due to the presence of the
JVs, we examine whether aﬃliated domestics automakers (“followers”) learn more from their aﬃliated
foreign automakers (“leaders”) than do nonaﬃliated domestic automakers.
To identify learning and knowledge spillover, we leverage our rich multidimensional quality data
5Brilliance Auto is the domestic partner of BMW and owns 50% equity in the joint venture BMW–Brilliance. The JV
produces BMW models sold in China. At the same time, Brilliance Auto has its own independent production facilities
and produces indigenous models under the Brilliance brand.
6The data are sourced from J.D. Power, a leading marketing ﬁrm best known for its automobile quality rankings.
These measures are widely regarded as industry-standard:
https://www.vox.com/the-goods/2018/11/27/18105479/
jd-power-car-commercials.
7As a common practice under quid pro quo, foreign automakers oﬀer existing product lines and knowhow as equity,
while domestic partners provide capital and manufacturing facilities when setting up a JV.
2


===== [PAGE 6] =====

and examine whether aﬃliated domestic followers adopt JV leaders’ quality strengths in their indepen-
dent production. An example helps illustrate our empirical strategy. BMW–Brilliance, a JV between
the German automaker BMW and the domestic automaker Brilliance, produces BMW models that
have strong engine performance.
Toyota–FAW, a JV between the Japanese automaker Toyota and
the domestic automaker First Auto Work, produces Toyota models that are fuel eﬃcient. We examine
whether Brillaince produces indigenous models with better engine performance and FAW produces more
fuel-eﬃcient models relative to indigenous models produced by other domestic automakers.
Our analysis takes advantage of detailed quality measures along multiple dimensions and exploits
within-model relative quality across dimensions.
Speciﬁcally, the main speciﬁcation controls for the
overall quality of each model in each period. This accounts for potential endogenous JV formation,
whereby foreign and domestic automakers strategically choose each other as partners based on overall
quality. In addition, it also controls for industry-wide technological progress in diﬀerent quality dimen-
sions (e.g., fuel-saving technologies) and the quality strengths common across vehicle segments (e.g.,
better safety features in the luxury segment).8 We ﬁnd that when a JV model scores one standard
deviation higher on a quality dimension, the indigenous models of the aﬃliated domestic automaker
in the same vehicle segment score 0.087 standard deviations higher on the same dimension than the
models from other domestic automakers do.
We address a series of alternative explanations.
While our main speciﬁcation accounts for JV
formation based on overall quality level, one may be concerned about endogenous JV formation based
on relative strengths. For example, domestic automakers may seek foreign partners that are strong on
certain quality dimensions to compensate for their own weaknesses or augment their advantages. To
address this issue, we ﬁrst exploit an institutional feature by limiting our sample to JVs formed in the
1980s and 1990s. At that time, China’s passenger vehicle market was in its infancy. Most domestic
automakers had scant technological knowhow in passenger vehicle production. Therefore, it is unlikely
that JV partners were matched based on quality strengths. Nevertheless, the pattern of shared quality
persists for this subsample. To further examine any initial selection in JV formation, we focus on JVs
formed after 2000, for which we observe the quality performance of the leader and follower models from
the very beginning of the partnership formation. If anything, aﬃliated partners tend to exhibit negative
association in relative quality strength when the JV was formed, and only become similar over time.
This pattern further supports the learning and knowledge spillover interpretation: it takes time for
aﬃliated domestic automakers to learn from their foreign partners. Hence, similarity in relative quality
strength only emerges over time.
Next, we consider the role of geographic proximity. To the extent that production facilities of JVs
8Following the standard classiﬁcation system, we group models into eight segments: mini sedan, small sedan, compact
sedan, medium sedan, large sedan, small-medium sport utility vehicle (SUV), large SUV, and multipurpose vehicle (MPV).
Quality is measured in diﬀerent dimensions such as the engine, transmission, and interior, as discussed in Section 2.2.
3


===== [PAGE 7] =====

and their aﬃliated domestic ﬁrms are sometimes located in the same region, the patterns of knowl-
edge spillover could be partly driven by geographic proximity rather than ownership aﬃliation per
se.
Exploring the partial overlap between the ownership and geographical networks, we show that
while spillover between aﬃliated pairs produced in the same province is the strongest, there remains
substantial knowledge spillover from JVs to aﬃliated domestic ﬁrms located in diﬀerent provinces.
We also consider potential demand-side confounding factors. One is that aﬃliated partners might
target the same set of consumers and hence design similar products. However, analyses using household
vehicle ownership surveys indicate that most car buyers do not consider models from JVs and aﬃli-
ated domestic partners to be close substitutes. Yet another potential demand-side explanation for the
shared relative strength is brand image association: if consumers perceive aﬃliated partners as sharing
similar quality strength, such perception may then induce domestic ﬁrms to strategically specialize in
certain quality dimension to exploit the positive association. To examine this, we leverage an additional
consumer survey to gauge consumers’ awareness of ownership aﬃliation and examine whether stronger
awareness of a JV partnership leads to greater similarity in relative quality strength. The ﬁndings reveal
imperfect knowledge about ownership aﬃliation and alleviate the concern that strategic investment due
to brand image association drives the knowledge spillover patterns among aﬃliated partners.
Lastly, we show that the observed patterns of shared quality strength are not driven by explicit
market transactions such as patent transfers: only 27 out of over 10,000 patent transfers in China’s
auto industry originated from a JV. The ﬁndings are consistent with Holmes, McGrattan, and Prescott
(2015) which shows that the JVs themselves ﬁle a small number of patent applications in China.
All together, the reduced form results are indicative of learning and knowledge spillover from JVs
to their aﬃliated automakers. Next, we examine two potential mechanisms for this spillover—worker
ﬂows and supplier networks—both of which are documented in the literature. As carriers of technology
knowhow, workers move across automakers and serve as a conduit of knowledge ﬂow.9 We construct
worker ﬂows between each JV–domestic automaker pair using data from LinkedIn (China). We ﬁnd
signiﬁcantly higher rates of worker ﬂows between aﬃliated pairs than nonaﬃliated pairs. Flows from
JVs to aﬃliated domestic automakers, rather than the reverse, are associated with knowledge spillover.
In addition, the strength of the spillover increases with the share of high-tech workers (engineers and
designers) in these ﬂows. The estimates imply that the additional worker ﬂows that domestic automakers
receive from aﬃliated JVs can explain up to 54% of knowledge spillover from ownership aﬃliation.
We next investigate the role of parts suppliers, motivated by the observation that high-quality
parts and components directly aﬀect the performance of the downstream vehicles. JVs’ high quality
9Studies that document the role of worker ﬂows in transmitting knowledge between ﬁrms include Castillo et al. (2020);
Stoyanov and Zubanov (2012a); Maliranta, Mohnen, and Rouvinen (2009); Boschma, Eriksson, and Lindgren (2009); Møen
(2005), and works documenting this mechanism between foreign multinationals and domestic ﬁrms include Balsvik (2011);
G¨org and Strobl (2005); Poole (2013); Fosfuri, Motta, and Rønde (2001).
4


===== [PAGE 8] =====

standards could enhance the performance of domestic parts suppliers. If aﬃliated domestic automakers
source from the same set of parts suppliers that serve JVs, they could directly beneﬁt from the “shared
supplier spillover” (Kee, 2015).10 Using supplier network data from MarkLines, we calculate the number
of common part suppliers shared by JV–domestic model pairs. JVs and aﬃliated domestic ﬁrms have
greater supplier overlap than nonaﬃliated ﬁrm pairs, which can explain up to 65% of knowledge spillover
from ownership aﬃliation.
Finally, we turn to quantify the impact of quid pro quo on domestic quality upgrades and ﬁrm proﬁt.
Based on the estimates discussed above, the additional learning beneﬁts due to ownership aﬃliation
under quid pro quo improved the quality of domestic aﬃliated models by 3.8-12.7% from 2007 and 2014.11
To translate the quality changes into sales and proﬁts, we estimate a structural model of automobile
market equilibrium to recover consumers’ willingness to pay for quality. The improved quality as a
result of quid-pro-quo-induced knowledge spillover translates to 0.9%-3.9% more sales and 1.02-3.49%
higher proﬁts for aﬃliated domestic models between 2007 and 2014. Overall, we ﬁnd that while quid pro
quo facilitates quality upgrading in addition to industry-wide knowledge spillover, its overall impacts on
domestic quality, sales and proﬁts are modest. In light of the trade dispute between China and the U.S.,
these ﬁndings suggest that China’s recent policy change to remove the joint ownership requirement may
not signiﬁcantly hinder quality upgrades and sales performance of Chinese domestic automakers.
We acknowledge several caveats and highlight potential directions for future research. First, our
study focuses on the beneﬁts of quid pro quo for domestic ﬁrms but does not speak about the costs to
foreign ﬁrms in terms of either the proﬁt split or potential IP infringement risks. Understanding the
former takes us one step closer to evaluating the full costs and beneﬁts of the industrial policy and
speaks to the current policy debate. Second, our analysis focuses on spillover to domestic automakers
conditioning on the existing set of products and technologies introduced by foreign automakers. Future
work is needed to examine foreign ﬁrms’ incentives to introduce products and technology and more gen-
erally ﬁrms’ incentives to organize global supply chains in light of the global knowledge spillover.(Antr`as
and Chor, 2013; Buera and Oberﬁeld, 2016; Bilir and Morales, 2016).
Our work contributes to several strands of the existing literature. First, it speaks to the extensive
empirical literature on FDI spillover.
We refer interested readers to Harrison and Rodr´ıguez-Clare
(2009) for an excellent review. We highlight three key contributions to this literature. First, we focus
on whether and how the form of FDI matters, beyond its mere presence. Second, methodologically, we
propose a new identiﬁcation strategy that exploits rich within-product quality measures to control for
10A large body of work documents the positive impact of trade and FDI on the development of the local intermediate
inputs market and spillover via backward linkages (e.g., Javorcik (2004); Blalock and Gertler (2008); Javorcik and Spatare-
anu (2008); Havranek and Irsova (2011); Gorodnichenko, Svejnar, and Terrell (2014); Kee (2015); Eslava, Fieler, and Xu
(2015); Kee and Tang (2016)).
11We choose 2007 as the baseline year since all of the major JVs had been formed by then. This allows us to focus on
knowledge spillover conditioning on the set of existing market participants.
5


===== [PAGE 9] =====

industry-wide and ﬁrm-level potential confounders.12 Lastly, we look beyond TFP and study the impact
on quality upgrading using product-level quality attributes that embed ﬁrms’ technological capability.13
Second, our paper relates to the growing body of work in trade and development that aims to
elucidate the importance of technological innovation and quality upgrades for economic growth (see
Verhoogen (2020) for an excellent review). The existing literature focuses mostly on indirect measures
of technology and quality improvement, such as market shares and prices (Khandelwal, 2010), as quality
is rarely observed in standard ﬁrm surveys. Our study adds to a nascent literature leveraging detailed
quality measures for speciﬁc industries (e.g., Atkin, Khandelwal, and Osman (2017); Medina (2017);
Macchiavello and Miquel-Florensa (2019); Hansman et al. (2020); Bai et al. (2020)) to identify knowledge
spillover and examine the impact of FDI on domestic quality upgrades in developing countries.
Third, our study speaks to an emerging literature on the impacts of government-initiated technology
transfers (Giorcelli, 2019; Giorcelli and Li, 2021) and industrial policies (Kalouptsidi, 2017; Wollmann,
2018; Igami and Uetake, 2019; Chen et al., 2019; Barwick, Kalouptsidi, and Zahur, 2019; Lane, 2022)
on ﬁrm behavior, innovation, and growth.
Our analysis allows us to examine the role of China’s
longstanding but controversial quid pro quo policy in an important industry (Holmes, McGrattan, and
Prescott, 2015; Howell, 2018).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the industrial background
and data. Section 3 illustrates the empirical strategy. Section 4 presents the main empirical results and
robustness checks. Section 5 investigates the mechanisms. Section 6 discusses policy implications and
performs a quantiﬁcation exercise. Section 7 concludes.
2
Background and Data
2.1
The Chinese Auto Industry and Quid Pro Quo
When China launched its reform and opening policy in 1978, the country was an economic and tech-
nological backwater. China’s automobile manufacturing was low tech, with limited capacity. It had
virtually no production of passenger vehicles.14 To develop its domestic automobile sector, the Chinese
government allowed international automakers to enter the market but required them to partner with
12Existing work has relied mostly on cross-industry variation in the presence or intensity of FDI to identify the impact
on the host country (e.g., Haddad and Harrison (1993); Aitken and Harrison (1999); Javorcik (2004); Keller and Yeaple
(2009)). However, entry of foreign ﬁrms could be driven by unobserved industry-level shocks, such as changing demand
conditions and government policies, which may directly aﬀect the performance of domestic ﬁrms in the same industry.
More recent work has tried to deal with this challenge by leveraging external shocks (e.g., through tariﬀreforms as in
McCaig, Pavcnik, and Wong (2020) and foreign entry induced by the shocks.
13Most existing studies focus on TFP improvement as the key outcome variable (e.g., Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter
(2007); Keller and Yeaple (2009); Abebe, McMillan, and Seraﬁnelli (2018)), which reﬂects both the positive spillover eﬀect
and the negative competition eﬀect (Kosova, 2010; Lu, Tao, and Zhu, 2017; Fons-Rosen et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2018).
14The industry’s total production was only 146,000 units of heavy trucks and 2,600 units of passenger vehicles in 1978.
6


===== [PAGE 10] =====

domestic ﬁrms to set up production facilities. In forming JVs, foreign automakers oﬀer knowhow and
product lines as equity, which is capped at 50%, while domestic partners provide manufacturing facil-
ities and labor.15 There are two key rationales for the policy. The ﬁrst is to protect young and small
domestic producers in nascent industries. The second is to allow domestic ﬁrms to learn from their
foreign partners and enhance domestic technical capabilities.
The ﬁrst joint venture for automobile manufacturing was set up in 1983 between American Motors
Corporation (AMC, later acquired by Chrysler Corporation) and Beijing Jeep Corporation Ltd. (now
Beijing Automotive Industry Corporation [BAIC]). In 1984, Volkswagen joined Shanghai Tractor Cor-
poration (now Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation [SAIC]) to form a second JV in the country.
In the early years, foreign automakers used joint ventures as a strategy to avoid the high tariﬀof around
250% at that time. The majority of manufacturing activities consisted of “knockdown kit” assembly
and relied almost exclusively on imported parts. As a result, technology transfer was limited.
Prior to 2000, most aﬃliated domestic automakers relied on JVs for the production of passenger
vehicles.16 There were few indigenous brands in the country prior to 2000, as shown in Figure E.1. In
2004, the central government announced an explicit goal of developing domestic automotive technology
and promoting indigenous brands by supporting the establishment of R&D facilities with tax incentives.
The 2009 Automotive Adjustment and Revitalization Plan encouraged mergers and the reorganization
of automobile ﬁrms and called for the creation of new indigenous brands for both domestic sale and
export. Under these government policies, aﬃliated domestic automakers started to launch their own
passenger vehicle brands. For example, SAIC launched Roewe, and FAW launched its ﬁrst indigenous
brand, Besturn, both in 2006. Dongfeng built its own assembly plants in 2007 and introduced its ﬁrst
indigenous model in 2009. By 2014, aﬃliated domestic automakers had caught up with nonaﬃliated
domestic automakers in product oﬀerings.
Figure 1 presents a snapshot of the ownership network of the Chinese auto industry in 2014. Many
international automakers formed multiple joint ventures with diﬀerent domestic partners and vice versa.
For example, in addition to VW–SAIC, Volkswagen partnered with First Automobile Works Group
(FAW) to form VW–FAW in 1991. Likewise, a single domestic ﬁrm might have multiple foreign partners.
In total, there are seven large aﬃliated groups, as shown by the dotted blocks in Figure 1. To avoid
complications related to intellectual property rights, foreign automakers transfer the production line
of a given brand exclusively to one domestic partner. For example, VW–SAIC produces Passat and
15In 1978, China’s First Ministry of Machinery, in charge of automobile production, invited major international au-
tomakers to visit China and negotiated terms of technology transfer with the goal of developing the domestic auto in-
dustry. GM was the ﬁrst to send a delegation to China, in October 1978, and met with the Vice Premier Li Lanqing.
During the meeting, GM CEO Thomas Murphy put forward the idea of a joint venture, which was a foreign concept to
his Chinese hosts. The proposal to use joint ventures to incentivize foreign automakers to provide technology was quickly
reported to the pragmatic leader Deng Xiaoping, who supported the idea. It then became a longstanding policy. Source:
https://media.gm.com/media/cn/zh/gm/news.detail.html/content/Pages/news/cn/zh/2011/Aug/0802.html.
16Most nonaﬃliated domestic automakers did not start production till after 2000.
7


===== [PAGE 11] =====

Tiguan cars, while VW–FAW sells Audi and Jetta brands. There is no product-line overlap between
any pair of JVs. All aﬃliated domestic automakers during our sample period are SOEs. Nonaﬃliated
domestic automakers (those without foreign partners) include both SOEs and private ﬁrms.
The industry witnessed unprecedented growth after China entered the WTO in 2001. Sales of new
passenger vehicles increased from 0.85 million units in 2001 to 24.7 million units in 2017, with China
surpassing the US in 2009 to become the world’s largest car market.17 In 2017, China alone accounted
for more than 33% of global auto production and sales. The industry was highly competitive, with 48
ﬁrms producing more than 10,000 units in 2014. The number of JVs also increased steadily (Figure
E.2): by 2007, most major international automakers had launched JVs in China. Table E.1 lists the
JVs and their sales and market shares in 2014. While JVs dominated the industry, the sales of domestic
ﬁrms had also grown over the past decade (Figure E.3). This is especially true in the SUV segment,
where the market share of domestic ﬁrms grew from 27% to 36% between 2009 and 2014.
Under WTO rules, explicit technology transfer requirements for market access are not permitted.
Hence, quid pro quo in China has mostly been carried out implicitly via ownership restrictions on
joint ventures to facilitate technology transfer from foreign ﬁrms. As part of China’s broad industrial
policy, it is considered by some countries to create unfair advantages for domestic companies. Because
of the emphasis on technology transfer, this policy has been criticized as a state-sponsored eﬀort to
systematically pry technology from foreign companies. According to the 2018 China Business Climate
Survey Report conducted by the American Chamber of Commerce, 21% of 434 companies surveyed in
China faced pressure to transfer technology. Such pressure was most often felt in strategically important
industries such as aerospace (44%) and chemicals (41%).18
Amid recent trade tensions with the U.S., the Chinese government pledged to further open its
automobile market by lifting the foreign ownership cap by 2022, representing a major shift away from
the quid pro quo policy after around four decades. This will eﬀectively allow foreign automakers to
have solely owned production facilities in China. Following the pledge, BMW and its domestic partner
Brilliance reached an agreement whereby BMW would pay Brilliance $4.1 billion to increase BMW’s
ownership share in the joint venture from 50% to 75% by 2022. Some have speculated that this could
impact not only the Chinese market but also the global industry. Understanding the role played by
ownership aﬃliation is a crucial step toward understanding the implications of removing quid pro quo.
2.2
Data
Our empirical analysis beneﬁts from a multitude of datasets on the Chinese auto industry. We describe
each of them in detail below.
17Passenger vehicles include sedans, SUVs, and MPVs. Minivans and pickup trucks are considered commercial vehicles.
18Source: http://www.iberchina.org/files/2017/amcham_survey_2017.pdf.
8


===== [PAGE 12] =====

Vehicle quality measures Quality measures come from the annual Initial Quality Study (IQS) and
Automotive Performance, Execution and Layout Study (APEAL) that are conducted by J.D. Power
between 2001 and 2014.19 Between April and June each year, J.D. Power recruits subjects who have
purchased a vehicle in the past year in over 50 cities in China and surveys their user experience dur-
ing the ﬁrst six months of vehicle ownership. The survey covers the major passenger vehicle models
in China, which account for over 90% of the market share in terms of sales.
The total number of
survey respondents for 2014 is 18,884 and around 110 car owners per model. The IQS study reports
the number of problems experienced per 100 vehicles during the ﬁrst 90 days of ownership. The sur-
vey asks more than 200 questions, covering a complete spectrum of vehicle functionalities, which fall
under nine quality dimensions: exterior problems, driving experience, feature/control/displays, au-
dio/entertainment/navigation, seat problems, heating/ventilation/air conditioning (HVAC) problems,
interior problems, and engine and transmission problems.20 Industry experts believe that initial quality
is an excellent predictor of long-term reliability, which has a signiﬁcant impact on owner satisfaction
and brand reputation. The APEAL study elicits user satisfaction ratings over 100 vehicle quality at-
tributes, which are grouped into ten performance dimensions: interior, exterior, storage and space,
audio/entertainment/navigation, seats, heating/ventilation/air conditioning, driving dynamics, engine/
transmission, visibility and driving safety, and fuel economy.21
Figure 2 presents the relationship between vehicle prices and the two quality measures. Panel A plots
prices against the IQS, with the left ﬁgure controlling for vehicle size and horsepower/weight (a proxy
for acceleration) and the right ﬁgure further controlling for year, segment, and ownership type ﬁxed
eﬀects. Panel B shows the relationship between prices and the APEAL with the same controls. The
tight correlations between price and the IQS/APEAL indicators provide strong evidence that these are
credible measures of vehicle quality, with high-quality models consistently commanding high prices.22
Worker ﬂow To examine worker mobility, we collect data on the employment history for all past and
current employees in the Chinese auto industry who are registered on LinkedIn (China). The data
contain 52,898 LinkedIn users who have worked in 60 JVs and domestic ﬁrms. The spatial distribution
of these users is consistent with that of automobile production: the correlation coeﬃcient between the
number of LinkedIn users in a province and that province’s automobile production for 2018 is 0.89.
19The IQS survey was launched in 2001, and the APEAL survey was launched in 2003.
20The IQS includes items such as “Engine doesn’t start at all” (engine), “Emergency/parking brake won’t hold vehicle”
(driving experience), and “Cup holders – broken/ damaged” (interior).
21The APEAL study includes items such as “smoothness of gearshift operation” (engine/transmission), “braking respon-
siveness/eﬀort” (driving dynamics), and “interior materials convey an impression of high quality” (interior).
22We have also repeated our analysis using observable technology features installed on a car to measure quality. The
technology features we observe can also be classiﬁed into diﬀerent dimensions, including turbochargers, direct fuel injection,
emergency brake assist, anti-slip regulation, electronic stability control, dual-clutch transmission, and other safety and
comfort features. Results are qualitatively similar and are available upon request. Consultation with industry experts
suggests that IQS and APEAL are better quality measures than technology features themselves, which are sometimes
“bells and whistles”: many are easy to install but may function poorly, which is exactly what IQS is designed to capture.
9


===== [PAGE 13] =====

The two provinces with the largest auto production, Guangzhou and Shanghai, also have the highest
number of users in our data.23
We identify 4,099 users who moved at least once from one automobile company to another. For each
job switch, we compile information on the ﬁrm name and location before and after the switch as well
as worker characteristics such as current occupation and education level. The majority of workers who
changed jobs switched once (81%) or twice (16%). Our ﬁnal sample covers 3,086 job switches after we
drop observations with missing location data. Of these, 617 moved from JVs to domestic ﬁrms. The
data allow us to examine worker ﬂows as a mechanism of knowledge spillover.
Supplier network Data on the auto parts supplier network is compiled from MarkLines’s Who Supplies
Whom database.24 MarkLines started collecting data in 2008, but most of the supplier information is
available only for models produced after 2012.
Since data at the annual level are sparse, we pool
information from all years to construct the supplier network. Our ﬁnal sample covers 1,378 distinct
part suppliers, 271 vehicle parts under 31 part categories, and 459 vehicle models.25 Each auto parts
company supplies on average 2.8 parts for 11 vehicle models, and there are a small number of large
suppliers that cover many parts and models. For an average model, we have supplier information on
39 vehicle parts. While the data are not complete enough to be regarded as a census of suppliers, they
provide valuable information on the production network and capture the major parts suppliers.
Geographic location of auto plants We identify the plant location of each model using information
from auto ﬁrms’ oﬃcial websites (Table E.2). Figure E.4 maps vehicle models to their production cities.
Each circle represents a city.
Colors of the circle indicate the ownership composition of all models
produced in a given city. There is a partial overlap between the ownership and location networks. For
example, Dongfeng, one of the largest aﬃliated SOE ﬁrms, has a plant in the same city, Wuhan, as one
of its JVs’ plants (Honda–Dongfeng). It also has a plant in Liuzhou, which does not host any of its JVs.
At the same time, Geely, a private ﬁrm with no JV aﬃliation, has a plant in Shanghai, which hosts two
joint ventures (VW–SAIC and GM–SAIC). Our empirical analysis explores this partial overlap between
ownership and geographical networks to assess the role of both in mediating knowledge ﬂow.
Patent database Data on patent transfers are collected by China’s State Intellectual Property Oﬃce
and cover the universe of patent transfers between ﬁrms from 2001 to 2018. This information allows us
to examine the extent of market-based direct technology transfers between JVs and domestic ﬁrms.
23Ge, Huang, and Png (2020) ﬁnd that LinkedIn provides more accurate measures of worker mobility than commonly
used patent databases.
24MarkLines collects supplier information in a number of ways.
Some information is directly sourced from supplier
companies or downstream assembly ﬁrms. Some is obtained from vehicle teardowns, where supplier information is retrieved
from the label or stamp on vehicle parts. Press releases and news articles are another important data source.
25For example, part categories include the ventilation system, the engine’s lubrication system, interior accessories, and
exterior accessories. A part category contains multiple parts. For example, the lubrication system of the engine includes
a sump, oil galleries, an oil pump, and a ﬁlter.
10


===== [PAGE 14] =====

Household vehicle ownership survey Finally, we complement the above data sets with a large,
nationally representative household-level survey conducted annually by the China National Information
Center from 2009 to 2014. Each household in the survey reports the vehicle purchased and alternative
models considered. We use these choices to assess whether JVs and aﬃliated SOEs serve consumers
with correlated quality preferences.
2.3
Descriptive Quality Upgrade Patterns
We begin by documenting descriptive quality upgrade patterns across ownership types. J.D. Power’s
raw IQS scores report malfunction rates of parts and components and represent an objective measure
of vehicle performance.26 Figure 3 plots the dramatic improvement in the overall IQS score during the
sample period, summed across all nine quality dimensions, for JVs, aﬃliated SOEs, and nonaﬃliated
domestic automakers, respectively (note that a smaller number of defects indicates higher quality). In
2003, JVs had signiﬁcantly higher quality than the other two carmaker types: the number of defects
per 100 vehicles was 278 for JV models, in contrast to 508 for models produced by aﬃliated domestic
ﬁrms and 349 for those produced by nonaﬃliated domestic ﬁrms. By 2014, the overall IQS score of
the domestic models had largely converged to that of JVs: the number of defects per 100 vehicles was
94 for JV models, 123 for models from aﬃliated domestic ﬁrms, and 134 for those from nonaﬃliated
automakers. Our empirical strategy seeks to isolate the role of ownership aﬃliation under quid pro quo
in driving the quality improvement of domestic models from other confounders.
Table 1 reports the summary statistics of IQS and APEAL scores by year and ownership type for
each of the quality dimensions. Since the raw IQS and APEAL scores (the malfunction rates) diﬀer
substantially in magnitude across diﬀerent quality dimensions, we separately standardize the responses
for each of the IQS survey questions and APEAL questions using all model-year observations. Then,
we aggregate the standardized z-scores to the nine IQS dimensions and ten APEAL dimensions. There
is signiﬁcant heterogeneity in quality performance across diﬀerent dimensions among ﬁrms within an
ownership type, a key source of variation that we exploit in our empirical strategy.
3
Empirical Strategy
3.1
Empirical Framework
The goal of our empirical analysis is to identify learning and knowledge spillover induced by the own-
ership aﬃliation stipulations under quid pro quo in addition to any industry-wide learning and quality
26On the other hand, APEAL scores, measuring consumer satisfaction, may be aﬀected by consumer perceptions and
could evolve over time as consumers become more knowledgeable about quality.
As shown in Table 1, the over-time
improvement in APEAL is much more modest compared to the improvement in IQS.
11


===== [PAGE 15] =====

improvements. If the domestic partners in JVs were randomly assigned, comparing the quality of ve-
hicles produced by aﬃliated and nonaﬃliated domestic ﬁrms before and after the JV formation would
identify the eﬀects of quid pro quo. However, there are two key identiﬁcation challenges in our em-
pirical setting. First, most domestic ﬁrms did not introduce their indigenous brands until after the
JV formation; as a result, we rarely observe their quality before the JV formation. Second, the selec-
tion of domestic partners is not random. For example, all the aﬃliated domestic partners are SOEs,
which could have diﬀerent baseline quality, production capability, and upgrading dynamics from the
nonaﬃliated private ﬁrms.
To confront these empirical challenges, we propose a novel identiﬁcation strategy that exploits the
multi-dimensional quality measures within ﬁrm-product. Our research design follows a simple intuition:
if there are additional learning beneﬁts through ownership aﬃliation, then the aﬃliated domestic au-
tomakers would more likely adopt the quality strengths of their JV partners than nonaﬃliated domestic
ﬁrms. For example, German brands such as BMW, Mercedes Benz, and Volkswagen are often asso-
ciated with high quality in engine performance, driving dynamics, and safety dimensions. If models
produced by their aﬃliated domestic automakers exhibit higher quality in these same dimensions than
nonaﬃliated models, ceteris paribus, that is indicative of learning and knowledge spillover via ownership
aﬃliation.27
Figure 4 illustrates this with a speciﬁc example. It shows the engine quality and interior quality of
four models, two from JVs (BMW–Brilliance and Toyota–FAW) and two from the aﬃliated domestic
automakers (Brilliance and FAW). The JV model from BMW–Brilliance has stronger engine performance
but is weaker in interior quality than the model from Toyota–FAW. The two domestic models produced
by Brilliance and FAW exhibit similar relative strengths, consistent with learning.
To examine such patterns systematically, we implement two steps. First, we measure the relative
strength of each model by partialing out a rich set of ﬁxed eﬀects that control for common unobservables
that aﬀect quality. This allows us to obtain the relative quality strength for both JV models and domestic
models that is purged of common confounders. We do this separately for JV and domestic models.
Speciﬁcally, we construct the residualized (i.e., relative) quality score for model i in vehicle segment s
for quality dimension k in year t by partialing out ﬁxed eﬀects for model-year it (e.g., BMW–Brilliance
27One could micro-found this intuition using a model in which ﬁrms choose how much to invest in each quality dimension
and incur a cost in improving each quality dimension. Learning from the aﬃliated JVs lowers the costs of quality upgrades,
and such learning beneﬁt is larger the stronger the leader is in a given quality dimension (or the wider the quality gap
is between the leader and follower). In equilibrium, ceteris paribus, aﬃliated domestic ﬁrms would invest more in quality
dimensions the JV partner is stronger at, relative to non-aﬃliated domestic ﬁrms and relative to the ﬁrm’s investments in
other quality dimensions. This then translates into shared relative quality strengths between the aﬃliated pairs, which we
exploit in the empirical identiﬁcation. Appendix C formalizes the intuition.
12


===== [PAGE 16] =====

X3 in 2014) and segment-dimension-year skt (e.g., engine of small-medium SUV in 2014):28
Scoreikt = λit + λskt + ^
Scoreikt,
(1)
where model-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects (λit) absorb the overall quality of each model and any time-varying
changes. This accounts for the fact that models produced by aﬃliated SOEs may be on diﬀerent quality
trajectories from nonaﬃliated models due to the selection of the JVs. The segment-dimension-year
ﬁxed eﬀects (λskt) capture the diﬀerential trends of quality improvement across vehicle segments. For
example, it allows for greater engine power of SUVs compared to sedans and accounts for industry-
wide improvements in engine performance over time. The residual ^
Scoreikt captures model i’s relative
strength in a quality dimension k in year t and is the focus on our second-step analysis.
In the second step, we construct all possible follower–leader model pairs, where a leader is a JV
model (e.g., BMW–Brilliance X3) and a follower is a model by an aﬃliated (e.g., Brilliance H230) or
nonaﬃliated domestic automaker (e.g., BYD F3) in the same year. We regress follower i’s relative
quality on that of leader j:
^
DMScoreikt = α + β0 ^
JVScorejkt +
^
JVScorejkt × Zijβ1 + ǫijkt
(2)
where
^
DMScoreikt and
^
JVscorejkt are residualized scores for follower i and leader j in year t and metric
k that we obtain via Equation (1). Zij is a vector of pair attributes, such as whether the pair is produced
by aﬃliated automakers (i.e., a domestic automaker and its aﬃliated JVs), belongs to the same vehicle
segment, or is produced in the same province. The key parameters of interest are β1. This pairwise
research design allows us to examine heterogeneity in knowledge spillover among diﬀerent model pairs.
Our empirical framework represents a signiﬁcant departure from the approaches used in existing
literature on knowledge spillover from FDI to domestic ﬁrms, which mainly rely on TFP variation at
the industry level along with the inclusion of standard panel ﬁxed eﬀects (e.g., Haddad and Harrison
(1993); Aitken and Harrison (1999); Javorcik (2004); Keller and Yeaple (2009)). The key identiﬁcation
concern is that these standard panel ﬁxed eﬀects may be inadequate in controlling for industry-time-
level shocks that aﬀect both the entry/performance of foreign ﬁrms and that of domestic ﬁrms, such as
government policies targeting certain industries. By focusing on diﬀerent dimensions of quality strength
within a product-year, our analysis explores a much ﬁner level of variation and allows us to control for
time-varying unobservables at the ﬁrm and product level. At the same time, this rich set of controls
absorb industry-wide quality improvements. Therefore, if spillover from JVs beneﬁts both aﬃliated
automakers and nonaﬃliated automakers by the same magnitude, the estimate of β1 does not capture
28To ease interpretation, we multiply the raw IQS scores by negative one, so that a larger IQS number (e.g., a less
negative number) implies better quality (fewer defects).
13


===== [PAGE 17] =====

this— rightly so—as industry-wide spillover does not pertain to ownership aﬃliation and thus should
not be counted as the beneﬁt due to quid pro quo.
Finally, the two-step procedure in Equations (1) and (2) has advantages over the standard one-step
estimation where one regresses a follower’s quality on a leader’s quality with all the ﬁxed eﬀects. First,
it allows us to control for the time-varying average quality of the domestic and JV models separately.
As discussed above, the ability to absorb time-varying unobservables at the ﬁrm and product level
and isolate the relative quality strength is a key contribution to the existing literature. The standard
one-step estimation only controls for followers’ average quality. Second, as shown by Lee and Lemieux
(2010), under mild conditions, partialing out ﬁxed eﬀects ﬁrst could potentially increase the eﬃciency
of the key parameter estimates β1 while maintaining consistency. We present our main results based
on the two-step estimation procedure and perform robustness checks with the standard one-step ﬁxed
eﬀect model in Section 4.1.
3.2
Evidence of Relative Strengths
Before we move to the main analysis, we test a key premise for our empirical analysis: models produced
by diﬀerent JVs indeed have diﬀerential quality strengths that domestic ﬁrms can learn from. Figure
5 graphically illustrates JV models’ quality variation along three performance dimensions: driving
dynamics, engine, and fuel eﬃciency. It is evident that ﬁrms have diﬀerent comparative advantages.
For example, models by VW–FAW and Hyundai–BAIC enjoy better driving dynamics. VW–FAW and
BMW–Brilliance have more powerful and reliable engines. Nissan–Dongfeng excels at fuel eﬃciency.
These patterns are consistent with the common perception that German brands have prime engine
performance while Japanese brands are more fuel eﬃcient.
To quantify the extent of similarity in quality strengths among models produced by the same JV
ﬁrm, we ﬁrst estimate Equations (1) and (2) using JV pairs only. We randomly assign half of all JV
models as leaders and the rest as followers. Then, we take all models in a year to form an exhaustive
list of pairs, compute the residualized scores for each JV model and regress the follower scores on the
leader scores. This exercise also serves as a proof of concept for our spillover analysis below. If the
framework is capable of identifying relative strength among products within the same JV ﬁrm, we can
use it to examine the similarity in relative quality strengths between JV and domestic models.
As shown in Table 2, the coeﬃcient on the interaction term with SameFirm is positive and statisti-
cally signiﬁcant, indicating that models produced by the same ﬁrm exhibit similar qualiaty strength.29
The magnitude is also economically meaningful. When we include ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects as well as dimension-
year and dimension-segment ﬁxed eﬀects, a reduction of 10 defects in a JV model is associated with a
29As the follower and leaders are randomly assigned, the coeﬃcient estimate of β0 has no causal interpretation and is
purely the correlation in quality between a random pair of models.
14


===== [PAGE 18] =====

reduction of 3.1 defects in the same quality dimension among other models by the same ﬁrm. The co-
eﬃcient is stable across the diﬀerent columns of Table 2, with diﬀerent combinations of ﬁrm, ﬁrm-year,
model, and model-year ﬁxed eﬀects. Such within-ﬁrm cross-model correlation corroborates the patterns
in Figure 5. Firms do indeed specialize in diﬀerent quality dimensions, which sets the ground for our
analysis below examining spillover from JVs to domestic ﬁrms.
4
Results on Knowledge Spillover
4.1
Main Results
Our unit of observation is a domestic–JV pair by quality metric by year, with a total of 738,948
observations. There are 13,946 distinct domestic–JV pairs, and 723 belong to aﬃliated pairs. We have
nineteen quality metrics: nine IQS quality dimensions and ten APEAL performance dimensions.
Table 3 presents the estimation results for Equation 2. While our main speciﬁcation incorporates
model-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects λit, we also report less demanding speciﬁcations in Columns (1) to (5)
with ﬁxed eﬀects for ﬁrm, ﬁrm-year, or ﬁrm-year and model. These alternative speciﬁcations absorb
endogenous selection at the ﬁrm or model level: for example, the average quality of aﬃliated domestic
ﬁrms might be systematically diﬀerent from that of nonaﬃliated automakers.
Column (1) partials out ﬁrm, dimension-year and dimension-segment FEs. The coeﬃcient on JVS-
core captures the association in relative quality strengths between a random pair of nonaﬃliated mod-
els.30 The SameGroup dummy ﬂags follower–leader pairs that come from JVs (e.g., Toyota–FAW) and
their aﬃliated domestic partners (FAW). The interaction term between JVScore and the SameGroup
dummy captures the association in relative quality strengths between aﬃliated models. Its coeﬃcient is
positive but statistically insigniﬁcant. When we further add interaction terms to ﬂag pairs that belong
to the same vehicle segment (SameSegment) in Column (2), we ﬁnd that spillover occurs primarily
among products in the same segment (e.g., sedan or SUV). The triple interaction term of JVScore,
SameGroup and SameSegment is positive and signiﬁcant at the 1% level, indicating that ownership
aﬃliation enhances the spillover.
In light of the above ﬁnding, we focus on follower–leader pairs belonging to the same segment for the
remaining empirical analysis. In Columns (3) to (6), we gradually add more FEs to absorb ﬁrm-year,
model, and model-year variation. The results remain robust. When we look at Column (6), our main
speciﬁcation (also the most demanding speciﬁcation), the coeﬃcient estimate of the interaction term is
economically signiﬁcant: 8.7% of the quality improvement observed in a JV model would be transmitted
30By construction, the association in relative quality strengths between a random pair of follower–leader models, including
both aﬃliated and nonaﬃliated models, is close to zero given that the sample consists of all possible follower–leader pairs in
the same year. The absolute magnitudes of the coeﬃcients on JVScore and JVScoreXSameGroup capture the association
among nonaﬃliated and aﬃliated pairs, respectively, and the gap between the two reﬂects the additional learning spillover
to aﬃliated domestic models over the spillover to nonaﬃliated domestic models.
15


===== [PAGE 19] =====

to the aﬃliated domestic models in the same segment. Another way to interpret the magnitude is to
compare it with that in Column (6) of Table 2: the shared quality strength between aﬃliated JV–
domestic pairs is 31% (= 0.087
0.284) of that among models within the same JV ﬁrm.
One might be concerned that we over control and underestimate the strengths of knowledge spillover
by using a rich set of ﬁxed eﬀects. Note that our estimates are relatively stable across columns in Table 3
with diﬀerent sets of ﬁxed eﬀects. Hence, the concern of attenuated estimates is unlikely to be ﬁrst-order
in our analysis.
Robustness checks: We perform three sets of robustness checks. First, we explore an alternative ﬁxed
eﬀect regression speciﬁcation. Our baseline empirical strategy is based on residualized quality measures
after model-year and dimension-segment-year ﬁxed eﬀects are partialed out separately for leaders and
followers. Table E.3 reports the results of running one-step ﬁxed eﬀect regressions that use the same
combinations of ﬁxed eﬀects as in Table 3 as opposed to the two-step procedure. Mathematically, these
regressions are not the same, but the estimates are similar, and all of them suggest that learning and
knowledge spillover occur in the same segment and same group.
Second, we experiment with alternative clustering of the standard errors. The standard errors in
Table 3 are two-way clustered by i’s ﬁrm and quality dimension and j’s ﬁrm and quality dimension.
This allows for cross-sectional and temporal correlation of a given quality dimension (e.g., engine) across
models in the same ﬁrm. Table E.4 reports the standard errors clustered at six diﬀerent levels, including
by the leading ﬁrm and following ﬁrm, by the ﬁrm pair, or by ﬁrm-year. Our results are robust to all
of these diﬀerent levels of clustering.
Third, Table E.5 repeats the analysis with the IQS and APEAL scores separately. As described in
Section 2, the IQS survey is designed to be objective and record the number of defects while APEAL
measures consumer attitudes and perceptions. It is reassuring that the estimate for knowledge spillover
is stable whether we use the IQS and APEAL indicators separately or jointly.
4.2
Alternative Explanations
The ﬁnding that domestic models mimic the quality strengths of their aﬃliated JV models is consistent
with learning and knowledge spillover via ownership network. We now investigate several alternative
interpretations, including endogenous JV formation, spillover due to geographic proximity, overlapping
customer bases, brand image association, and market transactions for technologies. As spillover occurs
primarily among products in the same segment (as shown in Table 3), we limit the sample to follower–
leader pairs in the same segment for the rest of the paper. Including follower–leader pairs in diﬀerent
segments does not aﬀect the key parameter of interest.
Endogenous JV formation One might be concerned that the ownership network—the set of domestic
16


===== [PAGE 20] =====

ﬁrms that form joint ventures with foreign auto producers—is not random. For example, to overcome
their own weaknesses, domestic automakers may seek foreign partners who are strong on speciﬁc quality
dimensions. The initial negative correlation in quality strengths between the follower and the leader
could bias the coeﬃcient estimates downward, masking evidence of knowledge spillover. On the other
hand, if foreign ﬁrms choose to partner with domestic ﬁrms with similar quality strengths, it would bias
the estimates upward.
To address this issue, we ﬁrst exploit an important institutional feature. Many major JVs in the
Chinese auto industry were formed in the 1980s and 1990s, a period when domestic automakers had
virtually no passenger vehicle production capacity. Their production of agricultural machinery (such
as tractors) or heavy-duty trucks was low tech and relied on imports for key components. It was not
until the mid-2000s when these domestic automakers started to develop their own indigenous brands.
Therefore, in these early JVs, it would have been very diﬃcult, if not impossible, for foreign automakers
to predict the strengths/weaknesses of potential Chinese partners decades later, let alone to base their
partnership decisions on those predictions. Appendix A provides a brief history of two joint ventures
and shows that the ownership decisions were made by the central government with no evidence of
consideration of the relative technical strengths of either party.
In Table 4, we examine knowledge spillover separately for JVs formed before and after 2000. Column
(1) reproduces our baseline speciﬁcation (Column (6) in Table 3) using follower–leader model pairs in
the same vehicle segment.31 Column (2) shows that knowledge spillover is stronger from JVs formed
before 2000, whose partnership choices were unlikely to be inﬂuenced by selection on relative quality
strengths. In Column (3), we focus on JVs formed after 2000, for which we can directly examine any
initial association in relative quality strength between the aﬃliated partners and how the association
evolves as the partnership ages.
The initial correlation in relative quality strengths appears to be
negative, becomes less so over time, and eventually turns positive after 10 years.32 This pattern lends
further support to the learning and knowledge spillover interpretation: similarity in relative quality
strength only emerges over time because it takes time for aﬃliated domestic automakers to learn from
their foreign partners. Taken together, these results alleviate concerns over endogenous JV formation
as an alternative interpretation of our main ﬁndings.
Spillover due to geographic proximity Existing literature has documented the role of geographic
proximity in promoting spatially-mediated knowledge spillover (Jaﬀe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson, 1993;
Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen, 2013). To the extent that production facilities of JVs and their
31The SameGroup coeﬃcient in Column (1) of Table 4 when the sample is limited to model pairs in the same segment is
roughly the sum of SameGroup, SameSeg, and SameGroup × SameSeg coeﬃcients in the baseline speciﬁcation of Column
(6) in Table 3 when all model pairs are included.
32This is consistent with the positive interaction in Column (2) of Table 4 for JVs established before 2000, most of which
were more than 10 years old at the beginning of our sample period.
17


===== [PAGE 21] =====

aﬃliated domestic ﬁrms are sometimes located close to one another, the patterns of knowledge spillover
could be partly driven by geographic proximity rather than ownership aﬃliation per se.33 To examine
this, we exploit the partial overlap between the ownership and geographical networks as shown in Figure
E.4. We construct a dummy for two models in the same province and interact the ownership dummies
(SameGroup and DiﬀGroup) with the location dummies (SameProvince and DiﬀProvince). Column
(1) of Table 5 replicates the baseline speciﬁcation. Column (2) presents the full interaction between
ownership and geography dummies. While spillover between aﬃliated pairs in the same province is the
strongest, there remains substantial knowledge spillover from JVs to aﬃliated domestic ﬁrms in diﬀerent
provinces. In addition, the spillover between unaﬃliated pairs in the same province is positive but
insigniﬁcant. These patterns provide evidence that the knowledge spillover detected between aﬃliated
pairs cannot be fully explained by geographic proximity.
Overlapping customer bases The observed similarity in relative quality strength may be partially
driven by demand-side factors, as opposed to learning and knowledge spillover on the supply side.
For example, models produced by aﬃliated automakers may be designed to target the same group of
consumers who share similar taste, which then leads ﬁrms to specialize in similar quality dimensions.
To examine this possibility, we leverage the household choices reported in the vehicle ownership survey
(described in Section 2.2) to evaluate whether JVs and domestic automakers have overlapping customer
bases. We estimate the following equation using a sample that consists of all pairwise combinations of
models in the same year:
Log(TopTwoChoicesijt + 1)
=
α + β1SameGroupij + β2SameGroupij × SameSegmentij
+
Xijtγ + λt + εijt
where TopTwoChoicesijt counts the number of times that model pair {i, j} is listed as the top two choices
by some household. A larger number suggests that the model pair is considered by more households to
be close substitutes and is evidence that both models compete for similar customers. The key regressors
are SameGroup dummy and its interaction with SameSegment dummy, as deﬁned in Section 4.1. We
control for whether the two models have the same segment, same ownership type, or same ﬁrm and for
diﬀerences in price, size, and engine power.
The results in Table E.6 provide no evidence that aﬃliated model pairs are more likely to attract
similar customers than a random pair of JV and domestic models, ceteris paribus. If anything, the
estimates suggest that a pair of aﬃliated models in the same segment are slightly less likely to be listed
as the top two choices. This is not surprising given that JV models are considerably more expensive
than domestic indigenous models and target wealthier households.
33In total, 267 out of 723 pairs of aﬃliated JV-domestic models are produced in the same province.
18


===== [PAGE 22] =====

Brand image association Another potential explanation for the observed knowledge spillover is brand
image association. On the one hand, brand association could aﬀect consumer’s perception of product
quality strength. For example, consumers may perceive Brilliance to excel at engine performance simply
because it has a joint venture with BMW (BMW–Brilliance) even though Brilliance may not have
strength in engine performance. On the other hand, ﬁrms may strategically specialize in certain quality
dimension to take advantage of the brand image association. For example, Brilliance may strategically
invest in engine performance to take advantage of consumers’ brand perceptions, even absent any
learning and actual knowledge spillover.
To examine this possibility, we leverage an additional consumer survey to ﬁrst gauge consumers’
awareness of JV aﬃliations. The survey was conducted by a Chinese market research company and
covers 200 consumers at vehicle dealers in a large city in northern China. The survey respondents are
either potential buyers or existing owners of vehicles. The survey listed eleven domestic ﬁrms and asked
the respondents to identify their aﬃliated JV partners from a list of twelve foreign ﬁrms. Appendix B
describes the survey data in detail.
Results are shown in Appendix Figure E.5. Two patterns stand out. First, while consumers exhibit
some awareness of ownership aﬃliation, such knowledge is far from perfect. On average, a JV aﬃliation
was recognized by only 43% of the survey respondents. Second, there is signiﬁcant heterogeneity among
diﬀerent JVs: for example, 78% of consumers reorganized Brilliance-BMW, compared to only 2.5% who
recognized Changan-PSA. Exploring this heterogeneity, we show in Appendix Table E.7 that stronger
JV recognition, and hence (potentially) stronger brand image association, does not translate into greater
similarity in quality strength between the aﬃliated partners. These ﬁndings alleviate the concern that
either perception or strategic investment through brand image associations drives the shared relative
quality strength between aﬃliated partners.
Direct technology transfer The identiﬁed spillover eﬀect might be driven by market transactions.
For example, technologically advanced ﬁrms might sell or license their patents to ﬁrms that do not have
the capacity to conduct R&D in house. A common challenge in the literature that analyzes the impact
of FDI on knowledge spillover is that data on market transactions for technology transfer are rarely
observed (Keller, 2004).
To address this concern, we obtain data on all patent transfers from the National Intellectual Prop-
erty Administration (i.e., the Chinese Patent Oﬃce). For the period between 2001 and 2019, there
are 1,208,325 records of patent transfers nationwide, of which 10,626 correspond to the auto industry
(i.e., either the transferer or the transferee is owned by an auto assembly ﬁrm). Among the 10,626
cases of patent transfers, 68% are between a parent company and a subsidiary company or between two
subsidiary companies under the same parent company. Only 27 cases originated from a JV. The lack of
direct patent transfer from JVs to domestic ﬁrms is consistent with the ﬁnding in Holmes, McGrattan,
19


===== [PAGE 23] =====

and Prescott (2015) that JVs ﬁle a small number of patent applications in China in comparison to
either Chinese domestic ﬁrms or foreign multinationals. Therefore, the observed patterns of spillover
are unlikely to be driven by market transactions of technologies.
In sum, we have shown that domestic models share similar quality strengths with aﬃliated JV
models. The reduced-form ﬁndings support the interpretation of learning and knowledge spillover via
the ownership network. Next, we investigate the potential underlying mechanisms.
5
Mechanisms of Knowledge Spillover
The vehicle production process includes interrelated stages from product planning (e.g., market analy-
sis), to design and engineering (e.g., of the chassis, power train, exterior and interior), to the sourcing
of parts and components, testing, and assembly. The whole process involves complex interactions of
technologies, equipment, and workers. Learning could occur during all stages of the production and
through many diﬀerent channels, including through deliberate communication among partners, worker
ﬂows or shared parts suppliers. In this section, we examine worker ﬂows and supplier networks as two
potential mechanisms.34 Since we do not have exogenous variation in work ﬂows and supplier network,
the estimates do not have a causal interpretation and are suggestive of the mediation eﬀect.
5.1
Worker Flows
Flows of workers as carriers of knowledge can lead to knowledge ﬂow across ﬁrms.
Before foreign
automakers entered China, passenger vehicle production was nearly nonexistent, and the labor force in
the auto industry was small with few experienced technicians or executives. JVs provided a training
ground for the development of both engineering skills and managerial knowhow. As workers move from
JVs to domestic automakers, they take valuable knowledge with them. Many high-level managers and
skilled workers in domestic automakers have gained valuable experiences in JVs.
We compile job switches from user proﬁles on LinkedIn (China) for the automobile sector.35 We ﬁrst
document that workers are considerably more likely to move from JVs to aﬃliated SOEs. Among all
workers who switched jobs from a JV to a domestic ﬁrm, 27.2% moved to the JV’s aﬃliated domestic
ﬁrm. This fraction would have been 9.3% if worker movements were random.36
34We focus on pairs of domestic and JV models in the same vehicle segment, for which we have observed the strongest
spillover eﬀect (Table 3). The main takeaways are robust when we include model pairs in diﬀerent vehicle segments.
35Among job switchers who left a JV ﬁrm, 52.6% moved to another JV, and 47.4% moved to a domestic automaker.
Among those who left a domestic ﬁrm, 36.8% moved to a JV, and 63.2% moved to another domestic automaker.
36To calculate this, we hold the number of workers moving from and to each ﬁrm ﬁxed and assume that workers’
propensity to move to a ﬁrm does not depend on where they move from. For example, if 200 workers move to ﬁrm A and
100 workers move to ﬁrm B in total, we assume that all workers are twice as likely to move to ﬁrm A regardless of which
ﬁrm they move from.
20


===== [PAGE 24] =====

We then examine the extent to which worker ﬂow mediates knowledge spillover through ownership
aﬃliation. We measure the intensity of worker ﬂow using the number of job switchers between each
pair of JV and domestic ﬁrms and standardize it across all observations. Then, we interact worker ﬂow
with the same-group dummy. Table 6 summarizes the results. Column (1) shows that spillover is on
average 10.3% between aﬃliated pairs in the same segment. Column (2) shows that spillover is 3.8%
when worker ﬂow is at the national average and increases by 2.3% for each standard-deviation increase
in the volume of worker ﬂow. The estimates suggest that worker ﬂow explains 54% of the knowledge
spillover from JVs to aﬃliated automakers.37
Some underlying factors, such as closer connections between ﬁrms, could result in both larger worker
ﬂow and more knowledge spillover. Column (3) additionally controls for reverse worker ﬂow (from the
domestic ﬁrm to the JV), which is a proxy for business connections between the two ﬁrms. We ﬁnd
similar eﬀects for JV-to-domestic worker ﬂow, and no appreciable eﬀect for domestic-to-JV ﬂow. The
asymmetric results are consistent with anecdotal evidence that domestic ﬁrms beneﬁt from recruiting
technicians with working experience at JVs, especially in key production areas with technology bot-
tlenecks (Liu, 2019). Column (4) examines whether the eﬀect is larger for the ﬂow of skilled workers.
To conduct this estimate, we limit the sample to observations with positive JV-to-domestic ﬂows and
compute the share of technicians, classiﬁed based on job titles.38 Consistent with the previous liter-
ature (e.g., Poole (2013)), we ﬁnd that the strength of knowledge spillover increases with the ﬂow of
technicians from JVs to domestic automakers. Furthermore, we see that the ﬂow of skilled workers ben-
eﬁts both aﬃliated and nonaﬃliated domestic ﬁrms. This ﬁnding corroborates a popular view among
industry experts that JVs have trained a large number of technicians for the Chinese auto industry,
generating an important positive externality for both aﬃliated and nonaﬃliated domestic ﬁrms. We
lack statistical power to evaluate whether ownership aﬃliation itself confers an additional advantage.
While variations in worker ﬂow across ﬁrms are not exogenous, the results provide suggestive evidence
that worker ﬂow plays an important role in mediating knowledge spillover. Our ﬁndings are also in line
with the ﬁnding in Levitt, List, and Syverson (2013) that product defects in auto assembly plants are
aﬀected by the production experience stock embodied in plants’ broader organizational capital, which
could be aﬀected by ﬂow of workers with signiﬁcant technical and managerial expertise. More generally,
the ﬁndings are consistent with the existing literature that that the beneﬁt to a receiving ﬁrm is more
pronounced when workers move from more productive ﬁrms to less productive ﬁrms, rather than the
other way around, and that ﬂow of skilled workers transmits more knowledge than ﬂow of nonskilled
workers (Poole, 2013; Stoyanov and Zubanov, 2012b).
37The diﬀerence in the average z-scores of an aﬃliated and a nonaﬃliated pair is 2.43. Additional worker ﬂow from JVs
to aﬃliated automakers contributes 2.43 × 0.23 = 0.056 or 54% of knowledge spillover (the baseline is 0.103).
38We classify workers as tech-relevant and non-tech-relevant using the occupation classiﬁcation of LinkedIn.
Tech-
relevant workers include designers, mechanical engineers, software engineers and procurement, quality control, and R&D
workers. The rest are non-tech-relevant workers. Examples include operations, sales, and media and outreach employees.
21


===== [PAGE 25] =====

5.2
Supplier Network
The supply network can serve as another important conduit for learning and knowledge spillover. This is
especially true for the automobile industry, where quality of parts and components is a key determinant
of vehicle performance. The presence of JVs has been argued to have helped and incentivized domestic
parts suppliers to improve their product quality, beneﬁting domestic automakers.39
JVs’ sourcing
decisions may also provide valuable information to domestic partners and help the latter identify reliable
and high-quality suppliers. Here, we examine the importance of the so-called shared supplier spillover.
Our data aﬃrm that ownership linkages have a sizable impact on supplier overlap. Aﬃliated model
pairs share on average 12 common suppliers, in comparison to the average of 5.4 common suppliers
between nonaﬃliated pairs.40 We examine the extent to which the shared quality strengths between
aﬃliated pairs could be driven by common parts suppliers.
For each model pair, we compute the
Szymkiewicz–Simpson overlap ratio, which equals the number of common suppliers divided by the
smaller number of suppliers among the two ﬁrms. Then, we standardize the overlap ratio across all
observations and interact the standardized overlap ratio with the same-group dummy.41 Table 7 reports
the results. Columns (1) and (2) contain domestic–JV model pairs from all years from 2001 to 2014.
Columns (3) and (4) restrict the sample to model pairs from 2012 to 2014 to account for missing
information in the early years of the supplier network data (see Section 2.2). Overall, we see that larger
supplier overlap is indeed associated with stronger knowledge spillover; this is true for both aﬃliated
and nonaﬃliated pairs. The estimates from Columns (3) and (4) imply that the greater supplier overlap
among aﬃliated pairs can explain 65% of knowledge spillover via ownership aﬃliation.42
The importance of shared supplier spillover has been documented in the existing literature. For
example, using variation in supplier networks generated by a trade policy shock in Bangladesh’s garment
industry, Kee (2015) ﬁnds that shared supplier networks explain about 1/3 of the productivity spillover
from FDIs to domestic ﬁrms. Our results echo the earlier ﬁndings despite the diﬀerent contexts.
6
Quantify the Impact of Quid Pro Quo on Domestic Upgrades
We end our analysis with a quantiﬁcation exercise to evaluate the impact of quid pro quo on domestic
vehicle quality, sales and proﬁts.
The exercise proceeds in two steps.
The ﬁrst step quantiﬁes the
learning beneﬁts due to the ownership aﬃliation under quid pro quo on quality upgrades of aﬃliated
39China’s 1994 Auto Policy, which was lifted after China’s WTO entry in 2001, required all JVs to source at least 40%
of their parts and components locally. This led to the development of the upstream parts industry. For example, the rate
of local sourcing for FAW–VW Jetta was only 24% in 1994 but reached 84% by 2000 (Gallagher, 2003).
40MarkLines focuses on ﬁrst-tier suppliers. On average, a JV model has 64 suppliers and a domestic model has 32.
41We drop 3% of pairs for which at least one model has fewer than ﬁve distinct suppliers to reduce measurement error
in the overlap ratio. The results are similar if we use the full sample.
42The diﬀerence in the average supplier overlap z-scores of an aﬃliated and a nonaﬃliated pair is 1.06. Additional
supplier overlap contributes 1.06 × 0.037 = 0.039 or 65% of knowledge spillover (the baseline is 0.06).
22


===== [PAGE 26] =====

domestic ﬁrms, controlling for any industry-wide spillover. The second step then translates the quality
changes into impacts on sales and proﬁts. This step estimates a structural model of the automobile
market and conducts counterfactual analyses on vehicle prices and ﬁrm proﬁts. We choose 2007 as the
baseline year for the policy evaluation because all major JVs had formed by this point (see Figure E.2)
and thus we can focus on knowledge spillover conditioning on the set of existing market participants.43
Since our empirical identiﬁcation is based on relative quality strengths between followers and lead-
ers, additional assumptions are needed to quantify the policy’s impact on the overall quality levels of
domestic models. We make the following assumptions. First, we take the linear speciﬁcation in Equa-
tion (2) literally and assume that the size of spillover or the strength of learning is proportional to the
quality gap between the two. Second, for followers with multiple leaders, we use the average leader
quality. Appendix C provides more details. It also illustrates how knowledge spillover of this nature
translates into shared relative quality strengths between leaders and followers and that estimates based
on relative quality strengths (Equations (1) and (2)) capture the intensity of spillover.
We experiment with two diﬀerent assumptions on the dynamics of knowledge spillover. The ﬁrst
scenario assumes knowledge spillover and learning that domestic aﬃliated ﬁrms experience in a given
year are proportional to the diﬀerence between the JV model quality in that year and domestic model
quality in 2007. The second scenario assumes that learning occurs cumulatively each year. The beneﬁt
that aﬃliated domestic automakers receive in a particular year embodies all past learning with no
depreciation, where learning in a given year is proportional to the quality diﬀerence in that year. Which
assumption is more appropriate depends on the nature of learning (the frequency of model redesigns,
persistence of the acquired technical skills, etc.). We use the two scenarios to bound our predictions on
the eﬀects of quid pro quo.
Figure 6 shows the results based on our baseline estimate in Table 3. We use the total IQS score
as the quality measure of interest. The solid lines plot the observed annual average IQS scores for
JV models, aﬃliated domestic models, and nonaﬃliated domestic models. The dashed line plots the
predicted quality of aﬃliated domestic models in the absence of quid pro quo, i.e., if the additional
knowledge spillover due to ownership aﬃliation was removed in 2007. In the ﬁrst scenario, quid pro quo
contributes to an average of 3.8% improvement in quality for aﬃliated models between 2007 and 2014
(around 5 fewer defects per model), and an average of 2.8% improvement in quality for all domestic
models. With cumulative learning, the eﬀect amounts to a 19.5% improvement (around 24 fewer defects
per model) for aﬃliated models and a 12.7% improvement for all domestic models. Note that in both
exercises, any industry-wide knowledge spillover due to the presence of foreign automakers is kept the
same, as absorbed by model-year and quality dimension-segment-year ﬁxed eﬀects. Thus, the estimated
eﬀect purely captures the additional learning beneﬁt due to ownership aﬃliation under quid pro quo.
43Six small JVs with limited production entered after 2007. They accounted for 1.5% of market sales by 2014.
23


===== [PAGE 27] =====

To translate the impact on quality changes to sales performance of China’s domestic automakers,
we estimate an equilibrium model of vehicle demand and supply. Speciﬁcally, we extend the model in
Barwick, Cao, and Li (2020) by allowing both demand and cost of production to depend on vehicle
quality measured by IQS. Knowledge spillover under quid pro quo improves the quality of domestic
models, and thereby inﬂuences the sales and proﬁts of domestic automakers. We discuss details of the
model and estimation results in Appendix D.
Our estimates suggest that conditional on prices and other key vehicle attributes, the elasticity of
vehicle demand to IQS is -0.60.
Combined with the results on quality changes shown in Figure 6,
this translates to a 0.9%-3.9% increase in sales of aﬃliated domestic models between 2007 and 2014,
and a 0.5%-2.0% increase for all domestic models (equivalent to 330 and 1,120 million yuan, or $50 -
$165 million in US dollar). Overall, these results suggest that while quid pro quo facilitates learning of
aﬃliated domestic ﬁrms, its impacts on domestic quality, sales and proﬁts are modest.44 In light of the
trade dispute between China and the U.S., China’s recent policy change to remove the joint ownership
requirement may not signiﬁcantly hinder quality upgrades and sales of Chinese domestic automakers.
7
Conclusion
This paper studies the eﬀect of quid pro quo, the policy of requiring joint ownership in exchange for
market access, in facilitating knowledge spillover from developed countries to developing countries.
Leveraging unique datasets on quality ratings, supplier networks, worker ﬂows, and household surveys,
we document consistent patterns of additional knowledge spillover from JVs to aﬃliated domestic au-
tomakers as a result of quid pro quo beyond the general spillover induced by the presence of foreign
automakers. Consistent with the existing literature, we ﬁnd that worker ﬂows and supplier networks
are the primary channels of such knowledge spillover. On the other hand, the quantiﬁcation exercise
suggests that the ownership aﬃliation as a result of quid pro quo confers a modest beneﬁt in terms of
quality upgrades, sales and proﬁts for domestic partners.
Our ﬁndings imply that the high-proﬁle policy shift by the Chinese government to eliminate quid
pro quo in automobile manufacturing starting from 2022 will unlikely have a large impact on quality
dynamics and ﬁrm performance going forward. We end with an important caveat: our analysis abstracts
away from potential endogenous changes in product oﬀerings among foreign and domestic automakers
in the absence of quid pro quo. With a majority stake or even sole ownership, foreign automakers may
have stronger incentives to bring the most advanced technology into the Chinese market and oﬀer a
diﬀerent set of products, as they can better guard their technology knowhow. How such incentives are
shaped by global knowledge spillover is an important open area for future empirical research.
44While the eﬀect may seem modest, it is worth noting that our estimate of knowledge spillover is not attenuated by a
rich set of ﬁxed eﬀects. As shown in Table 3, the estimate is stable across columns and similar with weaker sets of controls.
24


===== [PAGE 28] =====

References
Abebe, Girum, Margaret S McMillan, and Michel Seraﬁnelli. 2018. “Foreign direct investment and
knowledge diﬀusion in poor locations: Evidence from Ethiopia.”
Tech. rep., National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Aitken, Brian J and Ann E Harrison. 1999. “Do domestic ﬁrms beneﬁt from direct foreign investment?
Evidence from Venezuela.” American economic review 89 (3):605–618.
Antr`as, Pol and Davin Chor. 2013. “Organizing the global value chain.” Econometrica 81 (6):2127–2204.
Atkin, David, Amit K Khandelwal, and Adam Osman. 2017. “Exporting and ﬁrm performance: Evi-
dence from a randomized experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2):551–615.
Bai, Jie, Maggie Chen, Jin Liu, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2020. “Search and Information Frictions on Global E-
Commerce Platforms: Evidence from AliExpress.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Balsvik, Ragnhild. 2011. “Is labor mobility a channel for spillovers from multinationals? Evidence from
Norwegian manufacturing.” The review of economics and statistics 93 (1):285–297.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Shengmao Cao, and Shanjun Li. 2020. “Local protectionism, market structure,
and social welfare: China’s automobile market.” American Economics Journal: Economic Policy
Forthcoming.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Myrto Kalouptsidi, and Nahim Bin Zahur. 2019. “China’s Industrial Policy: an
Empirical Evaluation.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile prices in market equilibrium.”
Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society :841–890.
Berry, Steven T and Philip A Haile. 2014.
“Identiﬁcation in diﬀerentiated products markets using
market level data.” Econometrica 82 (5):1749–1797.
Bilir, L Kamran and Eduardo Morales. 2016. “Innovation in the global ﬁrm.” Tech. rep., National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Blalock, Garrick and Paul J Gertler. 2008.
“Welfare gains from foreign direct investment through
technology transfer to local suppliers.” Journal of international Economics 74 (2):402–421.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen. 2013. “Identifying technology spillovers
and product market rivalry.” Econometrica 81 (4):1347–1393.
Boschma, Ron, Rikard Eriksson, and Urban Lindgren. 2009.
“How does labour mobility aﬀect the
performance of plants?
The importance of relatedness and geographical proximity.”
Journal of
Economic Geography 9 (2):169–190.
Buera, Francisco J and Ezra Oberﬁeld. 2016. “The global diﬀusion of ideas.” Tech. rep., National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Castillo, Victoria, Lucas Figal Garone, Alessandro Maﬃoli, Soﬁa Rojo, and Rodolfo Stucchi. 2020.
“Knowledge Spillovers through Labour Mobility: An Employer–Employee Analysis.” The Journal of
Development Studies 56 (3):469–488.
25


===== [PAGE 29] =====

Chen, Yuan, C-Y Cynthia Lin Lawell, and Yunshi Wang. 2020. “The Chinese automobile industry and
government policy.” Research in Transportation Economics :100849.
Chen, Yuyu, Mitsuru Igami, Masayuki Sawada, and Mo Xiao. 2019. “Privatization and Productivity in
China.” Working Paper.
Eslava, Marcela, Ana Cec´ılia Fieler, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2015. “(Indirect) Input Linkages.” American
Economic Review 105 (5):662–66.
Fons-Rosen, Christian, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent E Sorensen, Carolina Villegas-Sanchez, and Vadym
Volosovych. 2017. “Foreign investment and domestic productivity: Identifying knowledge spillovers
and competition eﬀects.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fosfuri, Andrea, Massimo Motta, and Thomas Rønde. 2001. “Foreign direct investment and spillovers
through workers’ mobility.” Journal of international economics 53 (1):205–222.
Gallagher, Kelly Sims. 2003.
“Foreign technology in China’s automobile industry: implications for
energy, economic development, and environment.” China Environment Series) :1–18.
Ge, Chunmian, Ke-Wei Huang, and Ivan Png. 2020.
“Engineer/Scientist Careers: Patents, Online
Proﬁles, and Misclassiﬁcation Bias.” Strategic Management Journal .
Giorcelli, Michela. 2019. “The long-term eﬀects of management and technology transfers.” American
Economic Review 109 (1):121–52.
Giorcelli, Michela and Bo Li. 2021. “Technology Transfer and Early Industrial Development: Evidence
from the Sino-Soviet Alliance.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
G¨org, Holger and Eric Strobl. 2005. “Spillovers from foreign ﬁrms through worker mobility: An empirical
investigation.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 107 (4):693–709.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Jan Svejnar, and Katherine Terrell. 2014.
“When does FDI have positive
spillovers?
Evidence from 17 transition market economies.”
Journal of Comparative Economics
42 (4):954 – 969.
Haddad, Mona and Ann Harrison. 1993. “Are there positive spillovers from direct foreign investment?:
Evidence from panel data for Morocco.” Journal of Development Economics 42 (1):51 – 74.
Hansman, Christopher, Jonas Hjort, Gianmarco Le´on-Ciliotta, and Matthieu Teachout. 2020. “Vertical
integration, supplier behavior, and quality upgrading among exporters.” Journal of Political Economy
128 (9):3570–3625.
Harrison, Ann and Andr´es Rodr´ıguez-Clare. 2009. “Trade, foreign investment, and industrial policy for
developing countries.” Handbook of Development Economics 5:4039–4214.
Haskel, Jonathan E., Sonia C. Pereira, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2007. “Does Inward Foreign Direct
Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?”
The Review of Economics and Statistics
89 (3):482–496.
Havranek, Tomas and Zuzana Irsova. 2011. “Estimating vertical spillovers from FDI: Why results vary
and what the true eﬀect is.”
Journal of International Economics 85 (2):234 – 244.
URL http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002219961100081X.
26


===== [PAGE 30] =====

Holmes, Thomas J, Ellen R McGrattan, and Edward C Prescott. 2015. “Quid pro quo: technology
capital transfers for market access in China.” The Review of Economic Studies 82 (3):1154–1193.
Howell, Sabrina T. 2018. “Joint ventures and technology adoption: A Chinese industrial policy that
backﬁred.” Research Policy 47 (8):1448 – 1462.
Igami, Mitsuru and Kosuke Uetake. 2019. “Mergers, Innovation, and Entry-Exit Dynamics: Consolida-
tion of the Hard Disk Drive Industry, 1996?2016.” The Review of Economic Studies .
Jaﬀe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. 1993. “Geographic Localization of Knowl-
edge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3):577–
598.
Javorcik, Beata. 2004. “Does foreign direct investment increase the productivity of domestic ﬁrms? In
search of spillovers through backward linkages.” American economic review 94 (3):605–627.
Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska and Mariana Spatareanu. 2008. “To share or not to share: Does local par-
ticipation matter for spillovers from foreign direct investment?” Journal of Development Economics
85 (1):194 – 217.
Jiang, Kun, Wolfgang Keller, Larry D Qiu, and William Ridley. 2018. “International joint ventures
and internal vs. external technology transfer: Evidence from China.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Kalouptsidi, Myrto. 2017. “Detection and impact of industrial subsidies: The case of Chinese shipbuild-
ing.” The Review of Economic Studies 85 (2):1111–1158.
Karabay, Bilgehan. 2010. “Foreign direct investment and host country policies: A rationale for using
ownership restrictions.” Journal of Development Economics (93):218–225.
Kee, Hiau Looi. 2015. “Local intermediate inputs and the shared supplier spillovers of foreign direct
investment.” Journal of Development Economics 112 (C):56–71.
Kee, Hiau Looi and Heiwai Tang. 2016. “Domestic Value Added in Exports: Theory and Firm Evidence
from China.” American Economic Review 106 (6):1402–1436.
Keller, Wolfgang. 2004.
“International Technology Diﬀusion.”
Journal of Economic Literature
42 (3):752–782.
Keller, Wolfgang and Stephen R Yeaple. 2009. “Multinational Enterprises, International Trade, and
Productivity Growth: Firm-Level Evidence from the United States.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 91 (4):821–831. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/rest.91.4.821.
Khandelwal, Amit. 2010. “The long and short (of) quality ladders.” The Review of Economic Studies
77 (4):1450–1476.
Kosova, Renata. 2010. “Do foreign ﬁrms crowd out domestic ﬁrms? Evidence from the Czech Republic.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (4):861–881.
Lane, Nathan. 2022.
“Manufacturing revolutions: Industrial policy and industrialization in South
Korea.” Available at SSRN 3890311 .
Lee, David S and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. “Regression discontinuity designs in economics.” Journal of
economic literature 48 (2):281–355.
27


===== [PAGE 31] =====

Levitt, Steven D., John A. List, and Chad Syverson. 2013. “Toward an Understanding of Learning by
Doing: Evidence from an Automobile Assembly Plant.” Journal of Political Economy 121 (4):643–681.
Liu, Jianli. 2019. “History of China’s Foreign Capital Utilization Since 1949: Stage Characteristics,
Positive Eﬀect and Main Experience.” Management World (11).
Lu, Yi, Zhigang Tao, and Lianming Zhu. 2017. “Identifying FDI spillovers.” Journal of International
Economics 107:75–90.
Macchiavello, Rocco and Josepa Miquel-Florensa. 2019. “Buyer-driven upgrading in gvcs: The sustain-
able quality program in Colombia.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP13935 .
Maliranta, Mika, Pierre Mohnen, and Petri Rouvinen. 2009. “Is inter-ﬁrm labor mobility a channel of
knowledge spillovers? Evidence from a linked employer–employee panel.” Industrial and Corporate
Change 18 (6):1161–1191.
McCaig, Brian, Nina Pavcnik, and Woan Foong Wong. 2020. “FDI inﬂows and domestic ﬁrms: Adjust-
ments to new export opportunities.”
Medina, Pamela. 2017.
“Import competition, quality upgrading and exporting: Evidence from the
peruvian apparel industry.” .
Møen, Jarle. 2005. “Is mobility of technical personnel a source of R&D spillovers?” Journal of labor
economics 23 (1):81–114.
Poole, Jennifer P. 2013. “Knowledge transfers from multinational to domestic ﬁrms: Evidence from
worker mobility.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (2):393–406.
Stoyanov, Andrey and Nikolay Zubanov. 2012a. “Productivity spillovers across ﬁrms through worker
mobility.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (2):168–98.
———. 2012b. “Productivity Spillovers across Firms through Worker Mobility.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 4 (2):168–98.
UNCTAD. 2018. World investment report 2018: Investment and new industrial policies. UN.
Verhoogen, Eric. 2020. “Firm-Level Upgrading in Developing Countries.” .
Wollmann, Thomas G. 2018. “Trucks without bailouts: Equilibrium product characteristics for com-
mercial vehicles.” American Economic Review 108 (6):1364–1406.
World Bank, Bank. 2018.
“Global investment competitiveness report 2017/2018: Foreign investor
perspectives and policy implications.”
28


===== [PAGE 32] =====

Figure 1: Joint Venture Network of the Chinese Auto Industry
Notes: This ﬁgure is adapted from Figure 1 in Chen, Lawell, and Wang (2020). It describes the joint venture network of the Chinese auto
market as of 2014. Orange boxes represent aﬃliated SOEs; blue boxes represent foreign partners in JVs; purple boxes represent private domestic
automakers; red boxes represent nonaﬃliated SOEs. The dashed lines indicate groups of JVs that share the same aﬃliated domestic SOE.
29


===== [PAGE 33] =====

Figure 2: Correlation between Vehicle Price and IQS Scores
Panel A. Vehicle Price vs. IQS
0
10
20
30
40
Price (thousand yuan)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Total IQS
15
16
17
18
19
Price (thousand yuan)
50
100
150
200
250
Total IQS
Panel B. Vehicle Price vs. APEAL
0
100
200
300
400
Price (thousand yuan)
600
650
700
750
800
850
Total $3($/
140
160
180
200
Price (thousand yuan)
650
700
750
800
Total $3($/
Notes: The ﬁgures are binned scatter plots between price and the IQS score (Panel A) and between price and the APEAL score (Panel B) based on data
from 2009 to 2014. The price data are only available only since 2009. The left ﬁgures control for vehicle size and horsepower/weight. The right ﬁgures
further add year ﬁxed eﬀects, segment ﬁxed eﬀects, and ownership type ﬁxed eﬀects. A lower IQS indicates fewer defects and hence better quality, while
a higher APEAL indicates better quality.
30


===== [PAGE 34] =====

Figure 3: Descriptive Patterns of Quality Upgrades
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
IQS
2001
2007
2014
Year
JV
Aff Domestic
Non-Aff Domestic
Notes: The vertical axis reports the IQS score, which is the total number of problems experienced per 100
vehicles during the ﬁrst 90 days of ownership across nine performance dimensions. We show the average IQS
score across all models of each ownership type. We multiply the IQS score with -1 so that higher values along
the y-axis indicate higher quality (for example, -100 denotes a better quality than -300).
31


===== [PAGE 35] =====

Figure 4: Leader–Follower Pattern of Relative Quality Strength
!"#$
%#&
!'#(
)#)
!&#*
!!#(
!'#&
!%#%
!"#$!%&''&()*+ ,-.+%&+/
01213($45# 6578
!%&''&()*+ 9:;<
45#-!+/3=%) >?<
+,-.,/
0,1/2.32
+,-.,/
0,1/2.32
+,-.,/ 0,1/2.32
+,-.,/
0,1/2.32
Notes: The bars show IQS quality scores for the engine and interior dimensions in 2014. The two
models on the left are produced by JVs, and those on the right are indigenous brands produced
by aﬃliated domestic automakers. A larger IQS score indicates more defects and lower quality.
BMW has better engine performance; so does Brilliance. Toyota excels at interior design; so does
FAW.
Figure 5: Diﬀerential Relative Quality Strengths among Leaders
BMW-Brilliance
GM-SAIC
Honda-GAC
Hyundai-BAIC
Nissan-DF
Toyota-GAC
VW-FAW
Firm
-2
0
2
4
Relative Strength (weakness)
Driving Dynamics
BMW-Brilliance
GM-SAIC
Honda-GAC
Hyundai-BAIC
Nissan-DF
Toyota-GAC
VW-FAW
Firm
-2
-1
0
1
Relative Strength (weakness)
Engine
BMW-Brilliance
GM-SAIC
Honda-GAC
Hyundai-BAIC
Nissan-DF
Toyota-GAC
VW-FAW
Firm
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
Relative Strength (weakness)
Fuel Efﬁciency
Notes: This ﬁgure shows relative quality strengths (after model-year and quality-dimension-segment ﬁxed
eﬀects are partialed out) across JVs along three vehicle performance dimensions measured in the APEAL,
namely, driving dynamics, engine and fuel eﬃciency.
Each circle represents a model produced by a given
automaker. The sample includes vehicle models in all segments in 2014.
32


===== [PAGE 36] =====

Figure 6: Eﬀects of Lifting Quid Pro Quo in 2007
-350
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
Average IQS Score
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Year
JV, observed
Non-Aff. Domestic, observed
Aff. Domestic, observed
Aff. Domestic, remove policy
-350
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
Average IQS Score
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Year
JV, observed
Aff. Domestic, observed
Non-Aff. Domestic, remove policy
Aff. Domestic, remove policy
Notes: The solid lines plot the observed quality improvement in terms of the total IQS score for JV and
domestic models. The dashed line shows the counterfactual quality dynamics of aﬃliated domestic models if
the quid pro quo had been lifted in 2006. The ﬁrst panel assumes that knowledge spillover and learning that
domestic aﬃliated ﬁrms experience in a given year are proportional to the diﬀerence between the JV model
quality in that year and domestic model quality in 2007.
The second panel assumes that learning occurs
cumulatively each year. The beneﬁt that aﬃliated domestic automakers receive in a particular year embodies
all past learning with no depreciation, where learning in a given year is proportional to the quality diﬀerence
in that year. These two scenarios bound the eﬀect of quid pro quo.
33


===== [PAGE 37] =====

Table 1: Summary Statistics: IQS and APEAL Scores
Ownership
JV
Aﬃliated Domestic automakers
Nonaﬃliated Domestic automakers
Year
2003
2014
2003
2014
2003
2014
Mean
Std
Mean
Std
Mean
Std
Mean
Std
Mean
Std
Mean
Std
Panel A: IQS scores
IQS 1: Audio/entertainment/navigation
19.7
11.9
5.2
2.8
34.9
19.5
4.2
3.3
16.1
4.8
4.3
2.9
IQS 2: The driving experience
66.6
31.0
20.3
7.0
102.1
30.1
25.8
7.7
77.9
31.2
27.3
6.2
IQS 3: Engine
38.0
19.9
18.6
7.6
74.8
46.2
21.5
6.4
44.4
16.6
25.2
5.9
IQS 4: Features/controls/displays
25.8
30.7
9.8
3.4
39.1
30.3
12.3
6.3
36.5
22.5
12.6
4.4
IQS 5: HVAC problems
34.5
20.8
8.9
4.4
60.2
28.4
11.5
6.1
37.0
10.9
11.9
5.4
IQS 6: Interior problems
15.7
10.1
7.8
3.6
40.8
25.1
9.7
3.4
23.0
17.8
10.5
4.9
IQS 7: Seat problems
31.3
19.7
4.5
2.5
54.3
27.2
5.1
2.4
41.0
18.1
5.3
2.9
IQS 8: Transmission
20.6
16.1
7.1
4.7
44.1
9.0
12.8
4.1
26.4
19.2
16.5
4.6
IQS 9: Exterior problems
26.0
15.5
12.8
5.9
57.6
27.0
20.5
8.2
46.2
12.2
18.9
6.4
IQS total
278.1
132.0
94.9
22.8
507.8
222.7
123.4
24.3
348.5
126.8
132.6
19.7
Panel B: APEAL scores
APEAL 1: Audio, entertainment, and navigation
79.3
5.4
97.4
19.3
73.3
5.1
93.4
15.8
76.1
4.6
90.9
15.0
APEAL 2: Engine and transmission
81.0
10.3
40.3
1.3
64.6
14.7
38.6
0.8
69.0
13.8
38.4
0.9
APEAL 3: Exterior
97.8
6.2
57.6
1.8
92.3
3.7
55.6
1.1
94.3
4.7
55.2
0.9
APEAL 4: Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
89.9
5.6
64.6
2.1
82.6
4.7
62.3
1.2
88.9
7.1
61.9
1.1
APEAL 5: Visibility and driving safety
32.0
1.9
72.2
3.7
30.6
1.4
69.5
3.4
31.0
1.3
69.1
3.1
APEAL 6: Driving dynamics
64.1
4.1
64.5
2.1
59.1
4.2
62.2
1.5
60.5
4.3
61.8
1.3
APEAL 7: Fuel economy
7.4
0.5
15.9
0.4
7.4
0.6
15.4
0.3
7.2
0.4
15.3
0.4
APEAL 8: Interior
138.0
7.8
112.5
3.5
129.2
5.3
108.8
2.0
132.5
6.2
108.2
1.8
APEAL 9: Seats
104.8
10.0
113.5
5.5
96.5
6.2
109.8
4.0
110.2
15.8
108.5
2.0
APEAL 10: Storage and space
93.7
7.0
87.8
4.5
87.4
6.5
82.8
4.7
91.0
8.7
83.2
3.8
APEAL total
788.0
49.9
726.3
37.1
722.9
48.8
698.4
24.1
760.7
57.8
692.3
21.3
Num of automakers
15
25
3
10
3
5
Num of models
27
118
4
30
4
19
Notes: The year 2003 is the ﬁrst year of the APEAL survey. The scores are at the model-by-year level, averaged over responses from approximately 100 car owners
for each model-year. IQS scores measure the number of problems per 100 vehicles in the ﬁrst three months of ownership across nine dimensions. APEAL scores
are user satisfaction ratings on ten vehicle performance dimensions. Nonaﬃliated domestic automakers include all private Chinese automakers and nonaﬃliated
SOEs that are not part of any JVs.
34


===== [PAGE 38] =====

Table 2: Relative Quality Strength among JVs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
6
LeaderScore
-0.020***
-0.016***
-0.020***
-0.017***
-0.019***
-0.019***
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
× SameFirm
0.312***
0.238***
0.302***
0.256***
0.301***
0.284***
(0.023)
(0.018)
(0.022)
(0.018)
(0.021)
(0.019)
Observations
790,215
790,215
790,215
790,215
790,215
775,222
Partialling out:
Firm FE
✓
✓
Firm-year FE
✓
Model FE
✓
Model-year FE
✓
✓
Dimension-year FE
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Dimension-Segment FE
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Dimension-Segment-Year FE
✓
Notes: We randomly assign each JV model to be either a follower or a leader (with a 50% chance each) and match each
leader and follower into pairs. The dependent variable is the quality score of a follower model. The unit of observation is
a model pair-year-quality dimension. Both leader and follower scores are residualized scores after the set of ﬁxed eﬀects
speciﬁed under each column is partialed out.
Standard errors are clustered at the follower ﬁrm-dimension and leader
ﬁrm-dimension level. *** implies signiﬁcance at the 0.01 level, ** at 0.05, and * at 0.1.
35


===== [PAGE 39] =====

Table 3: Knowledge Spillover from JVs to Domestic Firms
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
JVScore
-0.001
-0.008***
-0.006***
-0.009***
-0.007***
-0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
× SameGroup
0.019
-0.001
0.004
0.017
0.006
0.016
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.013)
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.010)
× SameSeg
0.043***
0.029***
0.040***
0.033***
-0.005***
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.006)
(0.001)
× SameGroup × SameSeg
0.108***
0.090***
0.116***
0.112***
0.087***
(0.018)
(0.017)
(0.019)
(0.019)
(0.018)
Observations
738,948
738,948
738,948
738,948
738,948
717,500
Partialing out:
Firm FE
✓
✓
Firm-year FE
✓
Model FE
✓
Model-year FE
✓
✓
Dimension-year FE
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Dimension-Segment FE
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Dimension-Segment-Year FE
✓
Notes: The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model. We consider all pairs of models produced by
JVs and domestic automakers. The unit of observation is a pair-year-quality dimension. Both leader (JV) and follower
(domestic) scores are residualized scores after various ﬁxed eﬀects are partialed out. SameGroup equals 1 if the two
models belong to a pair of aﬃliated automakers. SameSeg equals 1 if the two models belong to the same vehicle segment.
Standard errors are clustered at the follower ﬁrm-dimension and leader ﬁrm-dimension level. *** implies signiﬁcance at
the 0.01 level, ** at 0.05, and * at 0.1.
36


===== [PAGE 40] =====

Table 4: Results on Endogenous JV Formation
(1)
(2)
(3)
Founding Year
All
All
JVs Formed After 2000
JVScore
-0.006***
-0.010***
0.001
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.002)
× SameGroup
0.097***
(0.019)
× SameGroup × JVs Formed Before 2000
0.145***
(0.027)
× SameGroup × JVs Formed After 2000
-0.014
(0.026)
× SameGroup × JVs Formed After 2000 and Age ≤3
-0.232***
(0.070)
× SameGroup × JVs Formed After 2000 and Age ∈[4,5]
-0.110
(0.081)
× SameGroup × JVs Formed After 2000 and Age ∈[6,10]
-0.047
(0.048)
× SameGroup × JVs Formed After 2000 and Age > 10
0.072***
(0.030)
Observations
138,540
138,540
55,098
Partialling out:
Model-Year FE
✓
✓
✓
Segment-Dimension-Year FE
✓
✓
✓
Notes: The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model. We focus on pairs of models produced by JVs and domestic
automakers in the same segment, which explains the smaller number of observations than in Table 3. The unit of observation is a
pair-year-quality dimension. Column (1) replicates our main result in Column (6) of Table 3. Column (2) examines heterogeneous
eﬀects between JVs formed before and after 2000. In Column (3), we restrict the sample to pairs that involve models produced by
JVs formed after 2000 and estimate separate knowledge spillover eﬀects for groups with diﬀerent years of JV formation. Standard
errors are clustered at the follower ﬁrm-dimension and leader ﬁrm-dimension level. *** implies signiﬁcance at the 0.01 level, ** at
0.05, and * at 0.1.
37


===== [PAGE 41] =====

Table 5: Spillover through Ownership and Geographical Networks
JVScore interacted with
(1)
(2)
× SameGroup
0.097***
(0.019)
× DiﬀGroup
-0.006***
(0.002)
× SameGroup × SameProv
0.114***
(0.028)
× SameGroup × DiﬀProv
0.080**
(0.025)
× DiﬀGroup × SameProv
0.037
(0.044)
× DiﬀGroup × DiﬀProv
-0.006***
(0.002)
Observations
138,540
138,540
Partialing out:
Model-Year FE
✓
✓
Segment-Dimension-Year FE
✓
✓
Notes: The dependent variable is the quality score of a domes-
tic model. The sample consists of domestic–JV pairs in the same
vehicle segment where spillover is concentrated. The unit of ob-
servation is a pair-year-quality dimension. Both leader (JV) and
follower (domestic) scores are residualized scores after model-year
and dimension-segment-year ﬁxed eﬀects are partialed out. Inter-
action terms are dummy variables indicating whether the two mod-
els belong to the same aﬃliated group of automakers (SameGroup)
or are located in the same province (SameProv).
Standard er-
rors are clustered at the follower ﬁrm-dimension and leader ﬁrm-
dimension level. *** implies signiﬁcance at the 0.01 level, ** at
0.05, and * at 0.1.
38


===== [PAGE 42] =====

Table 6: Mechanism of Knowledge Spillover: Worker Flow
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
JVScore
-0.006***
-0.005
-0.006***
-0.006
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.005)
× SameGroup
0.103***
0.038*
0.027
0.044**
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.025)
(0.020)
× JVDomFlow
-0.001
-0.003
-0.011***
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.002)
× SameGroup × JVDomFlow
0.023***
0.023***
0.046***
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.008)
× DomJVFlow
0.006
(0.004)
× SameGroup × DomJVFlow
0.000
(0.005)
× JVDomFlow × HighTechShare
0.073***
(0.016)
× SameGroup × JVDomFlow × HighTechShare
0.033
(0.049)
Observations
138,540
138,540
138,540
80,621
Partialing out:
Model-Year FE
✓
✓
✓
✓
Dimension-Segment-Year FE
✓
✓
✓
✓
Notes: The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model. The sample consists of domestic–JV pairs
in the same vehicle segment. The unit of observation is a pair-year-quality dimension. Both leader (JV) and follower
(domestic) scores are residualized scores after model-year and dimension-segment-year ﬁxed eﬀects are partialed
out. SameGroup is deﬁned as in Table 3. JVDomFlow is a standardized measure of the number of workers who
moved from a JV to a domestic automaker and vice versa for DomJVFlow. We identify six “HighTech” occupations
directly related to the IQS quality measures. Those are feature designers, mechanical engineers, software engineers,
procurement managers, and quality control and R&D professionals. HighTechShare is the z-score of the fraction of
worker ﬂow in one of these six occupations. Column (4) drops pairs with 0 worker ﬂow (and hence an undeﬁned
HighTechShare).
Standard errors are clustered at follower ﬁrm-dimension and leader ﬁrm-dimension level.
***
implies signiﬁcance at the 0.01 level, ** at 0.05, and * at 0.1.
39


===== [PAGE 43] =====

Table 7: Mechanism of Knowledge Spillover: Supplier Networks
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
All
All
Since 2012
Since 2012
JVScore
-0.005***
-0.006***
-0.004***
-0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.001)
× SameGroup
0.098***
0.084***
0.060***
0.033
(0.021)
(0.025)
(0.020)
(0.020)
× SupplierOverlapRatio
0.016***
0.017***
(0.001)
(0.003)
× SameGroup × SupplierOverlapRatio
-0.004
0.020
(0.016)
(0.027)
Observations
128,354
128,354
71,364
71,364
Partialling out:
Model-Year FE
✓
✓
✓
✓
Dimension-Segment-Year FE
✓
✓
✓
✓
Notes: The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model. The sample consists of domestic–
JV pairs in the same vehicle segment. The unit of observation is a pair-year-quality dimension. Columns
(1) and (2) contain pairs from all years from 2001 to 2014.
Columns (3) and (4) restrict the sample to
model pairs from 2012 to 2014. Both leader (JV) and follower (domestic) scores are residualized scores after
model-year and segment-dimension-year ﬁxed eﬀects are partialed out. SameGroup is deﬁned as in Table
3. SupplierOverlapRatio is deﬁned as the number of common suppliers divided by the number of distinct
suppliers reported by the pair (the smaller number of the two), standardized across all pairs of models.
Standard errors are clustered at the follower ﬁrm-dimension and leader ﬁrm-dimension level. *** implies
signiﬁcance at the 0.01 level, ** at 0.05, and * at 0.1.
40


===== [PAGE 44] =====

Appendices. For Online Publication Only
A
Background of JV Formation in the Auto Industry
At the onset of the Chinese economic reform in 1978, Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping gave permission to
the automobile industry to bring in foreign investment to develop the industry. Seeking foreign partners,
China’s First Ministry of Machinery, in charge of automobile production, invited major international
automakers to visit China. GM was the ﬁrst to send a delegation to China in October 1978. During
the meeting with government oﬃcials, GM CEO Thomas Murphy put forward the idea of establishing
a joint venture.
Albeit a foreign concept to the Chinese hosts, the idea of using joint ventures to
incentivize foreign automakers to provide technology was quickly reported to Deng Xiaoping. Deng
supported the idea, which then became a longstanding industrial policy for the nation.45
The ﬁrst JV was set up in 1983 between American Motors Corporation (AMC, later acquired by
Chrysler) and Beijing Jeep Corporation Ltd., after four years of negotiations with the involvement of the
highest levels of Chinese government. According to the ﬁrst Chinese manager of the JV, the initiative
to form this JV was approved by Deng Xiaoping and six vice premiers. The signing ceremony took
place in the Great Hall of the People, signifying the critical role played by the central government.
Present during the ceremony was the Vice Premier and Minister of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and
Economic Cooperation, Chen Muhua, together with other high-level government oﬃcials. The ﬁrst
model produced by the joint venture was the Jeep Cherokee, a popular model in the US market and
chosen by Chen on her ﬁrst trip to visit AMC, instead of the obsolete BJ models initially agreed upon
by both parties.46
The second joint venture was formed in 1984 between Volkswagen (50% equity), Shanghai Tractor
Corporation (25% equity), Bank of China Shanghai Trust & Consulting Company (15%), and China
Automotive Industry Corporation (10%). China’s central government again played a major role in the
JV formation. In hopes of securing a partnership with Daimler-Benz, the Minister of the First Ministry
of Machinery (Zhou Zijian) led a delegation to visit Daimler-Benz’s headquarters in November 1978.
When Zhou arrived in Germany, he was surprised that Volkswagen (an unknown brand to China at
the time)—not Benz—was the most popular brand on the street. He decided to visit Volkswagen’s
headquarters, some 500 km from the original destination. The surprise visit to Volkswagen led to the
VW–Shanghai JV (later renamed VW–SAIC) six years later, again with a signing ceremony in the
Great Hall of the People.47
These discussions suggest that the establishment of early JVs was primarily determined by political
and idiosyncratic factors, with heavy involvement from high-level government oﬃcials. There is no
evidence of concerns regarding the relative technological strengths of domestic automakers, which did
not exist prior to the wave of JV formations.
45However, GM’s board of directors vetoed the proposal to invest in China in 1978. Two decades later, in 1997, GM
entered the Chinese market via a joint venture with Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation.
46See http://finance.sina.com.cn/chanjing/sdbd/20130924/013316827769.shtml?from=wap.
47See http://auto.sohu.com/20110118/n278942357.shtml.
A-1


===== [PAGE 45] =====

B
Consumer Survey on Brand Association
We leverage an additional consumer survey to gauge consumers’ awareness of JV partnerships in China’s
automobile industry. The purpose is to examine whether the observed knowledge spillover was driven by
brand image association, either through consumer perception or ﬁrms’ strategic investment in speciﬁc
quality dimensions. The survey (see below) was collected by a Chinese market research company and
covers 200 visitors at car dealers in a large Northern city. The city has no local automakers, which helps
avoid potential biases arising from better recognition of local JVs.
The demographic makeup of the survey respondents closely resembles that of the nationally repre-
sentative survey of vehicle owners described in section 2.2. 69% of the respondents are male. 21% are
30 years old or below, 31% in the 30s, 28% in the 40s, and 20% above 50 years old. 18% are high-school
graduates, and 36% have a Bachelor’s degree or above. 80% own or used to own a car.
The survey questionnaire lists 132 pairs of domestic and foreign ﬁrms. 16 of them have formed JVs.48
Respondents were asked to check JVs that they recognize. The rows and columns are randomized among
the respondents to account for potential cognitive biases, e.g., consumers failing to recognize JVs that
appear later in the table because they get tired.
 
1. Gender漣    Male        Female    
2.Age漣          <30,     30-40,     40-50      >50  
3. Education漡 High school or below,     Junior college or diploma,     Bachelor or above 
4. Do you or your family own or used to own a car:      Yes      No 
If “yes,” please list all car models you have owned (now and past):  
5. In the table below, each row is a domestic carmaker, and each column is a foreign carmaker. Please check any joint ventures that you 
recognize. For example, if domestic carmaker X is a joint venture partner with foreign carmaker Y, please check the cell under row X and 
column Y. If you think X has multiple joint venture partners, please check all the corresponding cells. If you believe X does not have any joint 
venture partner, please leave the row blank. 
澳
濕濠濪澳
濕濸瀁瀍澳
濣濦濔澳
濛瀂瀁濷濴澳
濩濪澳
濧瀂瀌瀂瀇濴澳
濝濴濺瀈濴瀅澳
濙瀂瀅濷澳
濦瀈瀍瀈濾濼澳
濡濼瀆瀆濴瀁澳
濚濠澳
濛瀌瀈瀁濷濴濼澳
濕濸濼濽濼瀁濺澳濔瀈瀇瀂澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
濕濬濗澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
濖濻濴瀁濺濴瀁澳濔瀈瀇瀂澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
濚瀅濸濴瀇澳濪濴濿濿澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
濙濼瀅瀆瀇澳濔瀈瀇瀂澳濪瀂瀅濾瀆澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
濗瀂瀁濺濹濸瀁濺澳濔瀈瀇瀂澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
濚瀈濴瀁濺瀍濻瀂瀈澳濔瀈瀇瀂澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
濕瀅濼濿濿濼濴瀁濶濸澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
濚濸濸濿瀌澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
濖濻濸瀅瀌澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
濦濻濴瀁濺濻濴濼澳濔瀈瀇瀂澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
澳
 
48The 16 JVs are Beijing-Benz, Beijing-Hyundai, Changan-PSA, Changan-Ford, Changan-Suzuki, FAW-Toyota, FAW-
VW, Dongfeng-PSA, Dongfeng-Honda, Dongfeng-Nissan, Guangzhou-Honda, Guangzhou-Toyota, Brilliance-BMW, Chery-
Jaguar, Shanghai-GM, Shanghai-VW.
A-2


===== [PAGE 46] =====

C
A Simple Model of Knowledge Spillover
We write a simple learning model to guide the quantiﬁcation exercise in Section 6. We make a couple
of assumptions. First, we take the linear speciﬁcation in Equation (2) literally and assume that the size
of spillover among the aﬃliated pairs is proportional to the quality gap between the two. Second, for
followers with multiple leaders, we use the average leader quality.
For illustration purposes, we assume that domestic models (followers) beneﬁt from knowledge
spillover from aﬃliated JVs (leaders) every year.
This is not crucial to the quantiﬁcation exercise
and we present alternative results that do not rely on this assumption. Formally, let qk
t denote the
observed quality of the follower in quality dimension k in year t. Let δk
t = ¯δt + εk
t denote the baseline
quality of the follower in dimension k in the absence of knowledge spillover. It consists of a component ¯δt
common to all quality dimensions and a dimension-speciﬁc component εk
t . Let Qk
t denote the observed
quality of a leader in quality dimension k and year t. It can be similarly decomposed into ¯Qt and µk
t ,
where µk
t measures quality-speciﬁc comparative (dis)advantage. Let ρ denote the intensity of spillover.
We write:
qk
t
=
δk
t + ρ(Qk
t −δk
t )
(C.1)
=
(1 −ρ)¯δt + ρ ¯Qt
|
{z
}
follower model-year FE
+ρµk
t + (1 −ρ)εk
t
(C.2)
Let ξk denote the follower’s residualized quality scores in dimension k. It follows that:
ξk
t = ρµk
t + (1 −ρ)εk
t
(C.3)
This expression maps to our pairwise empirical framework. Intuitively, knowledge spillover trans-
lates into similar quality strengths between the leader and the follower, ρµk
t . The intrinsic relative
quality strength of follower in the absence of spillover, εk
t , shows up as a noise in the estimation. The
identiﬁcation assumption is that the follower’s intrinsic quality strength εk
t is independent from the
leader’s quality strength µk
t . We examine and rule out potential threats to this assumption, such as
endogenous JV formation, overlapping consumer base, and direct technology transfer in Section 4.2.
We impute the value of ρ using our reduced-form estimates, and use Equation (C.1) to back out the
extent of knowledge spillover between each leader-follower pair in each year. For domestic models with
multiple leaders, we calculate average spillover from the set of leaders. The reduction in quality of a
follower when quid pro quo was lifted in 2007 is the sum of spillover between 2007 and year t.
A-3


===== [PAGE 47] =====

D
Eﬀects of Knowledge Spillover on Vehicle Sales and Proﬁts
We estimate an equilibrium model of demand and supply in the tradition of Berry, Levinsohn, and
Pakes (1995) to quantify the eﬀects of knowledge spillover on vehicle sales and ﬁrm proﬁts. Speciﬁcally,
we extend the model in Barwick, Cao, and Li (2020) by allowing both demand and cost of production
to depend on vehicle quality measured by IQS. The model would allow us to simulate counterfactual
equilibrium outcomes (e.g., prices and sales) when we lift quid pro quo.
D.1
A Structural Model of the Automobile Market
Our primary data covers provincial-level annual sales and vehicle attributes by model between 2009 and
2014. We deﬁne a province-year as a market. In each market, each household chooses from Jmt models
to maximize its utility. We deﬁne the indirect utility of household i buying product j in market m and
year t as:
¯uijmt = γqj,t−1 −αimtpjt +
K
X
k=1
Xjkt ˜βikmt + ξjmt + εijmt.
Utility depends on past vehicle quality qj,t−1, price pjt, vehicle attributes Xjkt, unobserved demand
shock ξjmt, and an idiosyncratic match value εijmt that follows the type I extreme value distribution.
We measure quality using the IQS score, for which a higher score indicates lower quality. We assume
that it takes one year for consumers to observe quality (hence the lagged qj,t−1). Past quality aﬀects
brand reputation, which inﬂuences demand. Household i’s marginal utility from a dollar, αimt, is deﬁned
as
αimt = eα0+α1ln(yimt)+σpνimt,
where yimt is the annual income of household i in province m in year t. Parameter α1 captures how the
marginal utility from a dollar changes as the household gets richer. The second component σpνimt is a
random shock representing idiosyncratic factors that inﬂuence price elasticity, such as inheritance and
assets accumulated in the past. We assume that all households dislike higher prices, as the exponential
form guarantees.
Xjt is a vector of vehicle attributes, including the log of fuel cost, vehicle size, engine size, and a
dummy for automatic transmission. It also includes brand ﬁxed eﬀects, segment by market ﬁxed eﬀects,
and year ﬁxed eﬀects. We allow a random coeﬃcient on the constant term to capture heterogeneity
in households’ outside options. The last element, ξjmt, captures all unobserved product attributes or
transient demand shocks.
On the supply side, we follow the literature and assume that all ﬁrms set prices at the national
level to maximize proﬁts under Bertrand-Nash competition. The marginal cost of product j in year t
A-4


===== [PAGE 48] =====

depends on vehicle quality, other vehicle attributes, and a random cost shock:
mcjt = qjtφ + Wjtθ + ωjt,
(D.4)
Parameter φ measures the marginal cost of quality improvement, such as additional costs incurred
in sourcing better parts and components. Firms also incur ﬁxed costs in quality improvement, such as
in getting technology breakthroughs or access to exclusive, high-quality suppliers. We do not model the
ﬁxed costs explicitly. The gains in variable proﬁts from quality improvement provide an upper bound
on the ﬁxed cost.
D.2
Identiﬁcation and Estimation
To identify households’ marginal utility from a dollar, we need to address both the endogeneity of prices
and the fact that market shares need to be “instrumented” in a non-linear model (Berry and Haile,
2014). To this end, we leverage three sets of instruments: the “BLP instruments”, consumption tax
rates, and panel variations in household income. In addition, we identify the preference heterogeneity
across diﬀerent income groups using a representative survey of new vehicle buyers conducted by Ford,
which shows the fractions of households in diﬀerent income brackets among all new-car buyers, and
among buyers in each vehicle segment. Our identiﬁcation strategy closely follows Barwick, Cao, and Li
(2020), where we provide additional details on identiﬁcation and estimation.
To identify preferences for quality γ, we assume that lagged vehicle quality qj,t−1 is uncorrelated
with unobserved product attributes ξjmt after controlling for brand ﬁxed eﬀects and year ﬁxed eﬀects.
We consider this assumption reasonable because past quality was decided before transient demand
shocks are realized, conditioning on brand and year ﬁxed eﬀects. With these ﬁxed eﬀects, we identify
consumers’ preferences for quality from two sources of variations: cross-sectional variations in quality
between diﬀerent products of the same brand and the changes in quality of each product over time.
D.3
Results
Table D.1 shows results from demand estimation. In column (1), where we do not control for brand
ﬁxed eﬀects, the IQS coeﬃcient also picks up the eﬀects of persistent brand reputation correlated with
car quality. When we control for brand ﬁxed eﬀects in column (2), we ﬁnd a smaller but still sizeable
eﬀect of past car quality on demand. The estimate implies that the elasticity of demand to IQS is about
-0.60, and an average car buyer is willing to pay around 100 yuan for one unit improvement in IQS (i.e.,
one fewer defect).
Coeﬃcients on all other main vehicle attributes are intuitively signed and statistically signiﬁcant. All
else equal, consumers prefer more fuel-eﬃcient, larger, and more powerful vehicles, as well as vehicles
with automatic transmission.
Wealthier households are less price sensitive, and there is signiﬁcant
heterogeneity in the access to the outside option among consumers.
Table D.2 shows results from the supply side. Coeﬃcient estimates on all key vehicle attributes are
intuitively signed. Improving IQS by one unit increases the marginal cost by around 38 yuan. Combined
A-5


===== [PAGE 49] =====

with the demand-side estimates, our results imply that improving IQS by one unit on average increases
variable proﬁt by around 62 yuan per car.
With the model parameters estimated for both the demand and supply sides, we simulate equilibrium
market outcomes allowing vehicle prices to adjust after lifting quid pro quo, under diﬀerent scenarios of
learning and hence quality improvement. Table D.3 presents the impacts on sales and proﬁt by diﬀerent
types of automakers. When we assume learning is static (that is, the beneﬁt that domestic aﬃliated
ﬁrms experience in a given year is proportional to the gap between this year’s JV quality and domestic
quality in 2007), we ﬁnd that lifting qud pro quo in 2007 would reduce sales of aﬃliated domestic models
in 2014 by 0.9%. Sales of nonaﬃliated domestic and JV models would increase by less than 0.1% due
to reduced competition. When we assume that cumulative learning, sales of aﬃliated domestic models
would fall by 3.9%. As shown in Table D.3, impacts on ﬁrm proﬁts are similar given the small changes
of vehicle prices.
Overall, lifting quid pro quo in 2007 would have reduced sales of aﬃliated domestic models in 2014
by between 0.9% and 3.9%, and sales of all domestic models by between 0.5% and 2.0%. Total variable
proﬁts by domestic automakers would fall by between 330 and 1,120 million yuan ($50 - $165 million).
Table D.1: Results from the Demand Model
(1)
(2)
Est.
S.E.
Est.
S.E
Linear Parameters
IQS (prior year)
-0.70***
0.04
-0.39***
0.05
log(Fuel cost)
-2.34***
0.25
-0.81***
0.24
log(Size)
10.41***
0.37
19.92***
0.48
log(Displacement)
1.32***
0.19
3.98***
0.22
Auto Transmission
1.21***
0.03
1.50***
0.04
Nonlinear Parameters
Price coeﬀα0
-5.39***
0.87
-2.64***
0.24
Income parameter, α1
-1.30***
0.07
0.76***
0.05
RC Constant, σ1
7.68***
0.51
7.96***
0.27
RC price, σp
0.22***
0.06
0.00
0.03
Fixed Eﬀects:
Year FE
✓
✓
Segment-market FE
✓
✓
Firm Type FE
✓
Brand FE
✓
Notes:
The table presents results from a random coeﬃcient
multinomial logit model (`a la BLP). The linear parameters cap-
ture the average preference across households while nonlinear
parameters capture preference heterogeneity. We use three sets
of IVs for identiﬁcation: the BLP instruments, consumption tax
rates which varies by engine size, and panel variations in house-
hold income. The ﬁrst-stage F-statistic is 713.2 for both columns.
The standard errors are clustered at the ﬁrm level. * p < 0.1,
** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
A-6


===== [PAGE 50] =====

Table D.2: Results from the Supply Side
(1)
(2)
Est.
S.E.
Est.
S.E
IQS (Current)
0.046***
0.005
0.037***
0.005
log (Fuel cost)
-27.53***
5.04
-31.65***
5.53
log (Size)
145.77***
2.74
168.89***
2.70
log (Displacement)
86.48***
3.73
96.56***
3.71
Auto Transmission
6.14***
0.51
7.74***
0.49
Fixed Eﬀects:
Year FE
✓
✓
Segment-market FE
✓
✓
Firm Type FE
✓
Brand FE
✓
Note: The table presents parameter estimates for the marginal cost
of production. The dependent variable is the marginal cost (’000
yuan) of each model. The standard errors are clustered at the ﬁrm
level. * p < 0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
Table D.3: Equilibrium Impacts of Knowledge Spillover on Sales and Proﬁts
Current
CF, one-shot
% change
CF, cumulative
% change
Sales (milion), aﬀdomestic
1.79
1.77
-0.86%
1.74
-3.90%
Sales (milion), nonaﬀdomestic
1.68
1.68
0.06%
1.68
0.20%
Sales (milion), JV
10.78
10.79
0.04%
10.80
0.15%
Proﬁts (bil yuan), aﬀdomestic
32.33
32.00
-1.02%
31.21
-3.49%
Notes: This table shows the eﬀects of lifting quid pro quo in 2007 on car sales and proﬁts in 2014. “Aﬀ
domestic” denote domestic automakers that form JVs with foreign automakers. Sales are measured in million
units. Proﬁts are measured in billion yuan.
A-7


===== [PAGE 51] =====

E
Figures and Tables
Figure E.1: Number of Models by Ownership Over Time
0
50
100
150
Number of models
2000
2005
2010
2015
Year
JV
Affiliated Domestic
Non-Affiliated Domestic
Notes: Thig ﬁgure shows the the number models of each ﬁrm type covered by the J.D. Power
surveys in each year. Aﬃliated domestic ﬁrms are the domestic automakers that have joint ven-
tures with foreign automakers. They are all SOEs. The number of models from these automakers
indicates the indigenous brands, i.e., brands produced solely by the domestic automakers. Nonaf-
ﬁliated domestic automakers are those automakers that do not have joint ventures.
Figure E.2: Entry of Joint Ventures
0
10
20
30
Number of JVs in the Chinese Auto Market
1984
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2014
Year
Notes: The ﬁgure plots the number of JVs in the Chinese auto market over time. Signiﬁcant entries
include: (1) 1984-1994: VW-Shanghai, VW-FAW, PSA-Dongfeng, Suzuki-Changan; (2) 1994-2000:
GM-Shanghai, Honda-Guangzhou, Toyota-FAW, Suzuki-Changhe; (3) post 2000: Ford-Changan,
Nissan-Dongfeng, Hyundai-Beijing, BMW-Brilliance.
A-8


===== [PAGE 52] =====

Figure E.3: Growth of the Chinese Auto Industry by Ownership Type
Panel A. Performance of JVs and Domestic automakers
2
4
6
8
10
12
Quantity of new vehnicle sales (in millions)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Value of new vehicle sales (in billion RMB)
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Year
JV sales value
Domestic sales value
JV sales quantity
Domestic sales quantity
Panel B. Performance among Domestic automakers
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Quantity of new vehnicle sales (in millions)
60
80
100
120
140
Value of new vehicle sales (in billion RMB)
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Year
Aff. Domestic sales value
Non-Aff. Domestic sales value
Aff. Domestic sales quantity
Non-Aff. Domestic sales quantity
Notes: Sales value and quantity are calculated using the license registration database. The sample
contains all models that cumulatively account for 95% of total passenger vehicle sales in China in
each year. It does not include imported models, which account for around 3% of total sales.
A-9


===== [PAGE 53] =====

Figure E.4: Geographical Distribution of Vehicle Production Plants in China
Notes: This ﬁgures shows a map of vehicle production sites in China. Each circle represents a city. Colors of
the circle indicate the ownership composition of the production plants located in a given city.
Figure E.5: Results from Consumer Survey
Notes: This ﬁgure reports the share of respondents in our consumer survey who correctly recognized various
JVs. 200 visitors were surveyed at car dealer stores in a large city in Northern China. Respondents were asked
to check the JVs they recognized out of 132 pairs of domestic and foreign automakers.
A-10


===== [PAGE 54] =====

Table E.1: Joint Ventures in the Chinese Passenger Vehicle Market
Joint Venture
Foreign Partner
Chinese Partner
2014 Sales
2014 Shares
VW-FAW
Volkswagen
First Auto Works
1668
.113
VW-Shanghai
Volkswagen
Shanghai Auto
1633
.111
GM-Shanghai
General Motors
Shanghai Auto
1510
.102
Hyundai-Beijing
Hyundai
Beijing Auto
1067
.072
Nissan-Dongfeng
Nissan
Dongfeng Motors
920
.062
Ford-Changan
Ford
Changan Auto
853
.058
Citroen-Dongfeng
PSA
Dongfeng Motors
658
.045
Toyota-FAW
Toyota
First Auto Works
568
.039
Kia-Yueda-Dongfeng
Kia Motors
Dongfeng Motors
562
.038
Honda-Guangzhou
Honda
Guangzhou Auto
424
.029
Toyota-Guangzhou
Toyota
Guangzhou Auto
333
.023
Honda-Dongfeng
Honda
Dongfeng Motors
297
.020
BMW-Brilliance
BMW
Brilliance Auto
259
.018
GM-Shanghai-Wuling
General Motors
Shanghai Auto
154
.010
Mercedes-Beijing
Daimler
Beijing Auto
147
.010
Suzuki-Changan
Suzuki
Changan Auto
143
.010
Mazda-FAW
Mazda
First Auto Works
94
.006
Suzuki-Changhe
Suzuki
Changhe Auto
87
.006
Mitsubishi-Southeast
Mitsubishi
Southeast Auto
69
.005
Fiat-Guangzhou
Fiat
Guangzhou Auto
60
.004
Mitsubishi-Guangzhou
Mitsubishi
Guangzhou Auto
49
.003
JMC
Ford, Isuzu
Jiangling Motors
43
.003
Landrover-Chery
Jaguar Land Rover
Chery
Inﬁnity-Dongfeng
Nissan
Dongfeng Motors
Qoros
Israel Corporation
Chery
Citroen-Changan
Citroen
Changan Auto
Total
11598
0.79
Notes: This table shows the sales quantity and market shares of JVs in 2014. Sales are denoted in thousand.
Landrover-Chery, Inﬁnity-Dongfeng, Qoros, Ciroen-Changan had released models by 2014, but their sales was not
captured by the License registrations data until 2015.
A-11


===== [PAGE 55] =====

Table E.2: Location of Auto Assembly Plants in China
City
Province
JV
SOE
Private
Panel A. Northeastern Region
Changchun
Jilin
Toyota-FAW, VW-FAW, Mazda-FAW
FAW
Jilin
Jilin
Daihatsu-FAW
Shanyang
Liaoning
GM-Shanghai, BMW-Brilliance
Brilliance
Haerbin
Heilongjiang
Hafei
Panel B. Northern Region
Beijing
Beijing
Mercedes-Beijing, Hyundai-Beijing
BAIC, BAIC-Foton, Changan
Tianjin
Tianjin
Toyota-FAW
FAW-Xiali
Great Wall
Boading
Hebei
Great Wall
Erdos
Neimenggu
Huatai
Panel C. Eastern Region
Shanghai
Shanghai
VW-Shanghai, GM-Shanghai
SAIC, Chery
Geely
Hangzhou
Zhejiang
Ford-Changan
DF-Yulong, GAC-Gonow
Zotye
Ningbo
Zhejiang
VW-FAW
Geely
Taizhou
Zhejiang
Geely
Jinhua
Zhejiang
Zotye
Hefei
Anhui
JAC
Wuhu
Anhui
Chery
Dongying
Shandong
GAC-Gonow
Weihai
Shandong
Huatai
Jinan
Shandong
Geely
Yantai
Shandong
GM-Shanghai
Nanjing
Jiangsu
Ford-Changan, VW-SAIC
SAIC, Changan
Changzhou
Jiangsu
Zotye
Yangzhou
Jiangsu
VW-Shanghai
Yancheng
Jiangsu
Kia-Yueda-Dongfeng
Suzhou
Jiangsu
Landrover-Chery
Nanchang
Jiangxi
JMC
Jiujiang
Jiangxi
Suzuki-Changhe
Jingdezhen
Jiangxi
Suzuki-Changhe
Panel D. Southern Region
Guangzhou
Guangdong
Nissan-Dongfeng, Toyota-Guangzhou, Honda-Guangzhou, Citroen-Changan
GAC
Foshan
Guangdong
VW-FAW
Shenzhen
Guangdong
BYD
Liuzhou
Guangxi
GM-Shanghai-Wuling
Dongfeng-Liuzhou
Haikou
Hainan
Haima
Panel E. Central Region
Zhengzhou
Henan
Nissan-Dongfeng
Haima
Wuhan
Hubei
Honda-Dongfeng, Citroen-Dongfeng
Dongfeng
Xiangfan
Hubei
Nissan-Dongfeng
Xiangyang
Hubei
Inﬁniti-Dongfeng
Changsha
Hunan
Fiat-Guangzhou, Mitsubishi-Guangzhou
BYD, Zotye
Xiangtan
Hunan
Geely, Zotye
Panel F. Southwestern Region
Chongqing
Chongqing
Ford-Changan, Suzuki-Changan
Changan
Lifan
Chengdu
Sichuan
Toyota-FAW, VW-FAW
Geely
Panel G. Northwestern Region
Xian
Shannxi
BYD
A-12


===== [PAGE 56] =====

Table E.3: Knowledge Spillover: Fixed Eﬀect Models
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
JVScore
-0.001
-0.007***
-0.006***
-0.007***
-0.008***
-0.002
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.001)
× SameGroup
0.024
0.004
0.022
0.017
0.021
0.033
(0.018)
(0.017)
(0.019)
(0.017)
(0.024)
(0.021)
× SameSeg
0.035***
0.022***
0.031***
0.032***
-0.008***
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.001)
× SameGroup × SameSeg
0.116***
0.093***
0.113***
0.145***
0.127***
(0.024)
(0.019)
(0.022)
(0.026)
(0.022)
Observations
739,001
739,001
739,001
739,001
739,001
738,695
Partialling out:
Firm FE
✓
✓
Firm-year FE
✓
Model FE
✓
Model-Year FE
✓
✓
Dimension-Year FE
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Dimension-Segment FE
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Dimension-Segment-Year FE
✓
Notes: This table replicates the speciﬁcations in Table 3 using one-step estimation with ﬁxed eﬀects.
The JV and
domestic scores are standardized IQS and APEAL scores without partialling out ﬁxed eﬀects. All ﬁrm, model, and
segment ﬁxed eﬀects are deﬁned at the follower-leader pair level. Standard errors are clustered at FollowerFirm-Dimension
and LeaderFirm-Dimension level. *** implies signiﬁcance at 0.01 level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.
A-13


===== [PAGE 57] =====

Table E.4: Knowledge Spillover: Alternative Clustering of Standard Errors
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
JVScore
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.001)
(0.001)
JVScoreXSameGroup
0.016
0.016
0.016
0.016
(0.010)
(0.022)
(0.028)
(0.015)
JVScoreXSameSeg
-0.005***
-0.005
-0.005***
-0.005***
(0.001)
(0.006)
(0.001)
(0.001)
JVScoreXSameSegSameGroup
0.087***
0.087***
0.087*
0.087**
(0.018)
(0.027)
(0.051)
(0.036)
Observations
717,500
717,500
717,500
717,500
Clusters:
Domestic Firm - Dimension
✓
JV Firm - Dimension
✓
Domestic-JV Firm Pair - Dimension
✓
✓
Domestic Firm - Year
✓
JV Firm - Year
✓
Domestic Firm
✓
JV Firm
✓
Notes: This table replicates Column (6) in Table 3 under four alternative clustering of the standard errors.
Columns (1) replicates our baseline speciﬁcation, which clusters the standard error two-way at domestic ﬁrm-
quality dimension and JV ﬁrm - quality dimension levels. Columns (2) clusters the standard error at domestic-
JV ﬁrm pair-quality dimension level.
Columns (3) clusters the standard error three-way at domestic-JV
ﬁrm pair-quality dimension, domestic ﬁrm-quality dimension-year, and JV ﬁrm-quality dimension-year levels.
Columns (4) clusters the standard error two-way at domestic ﬁrm and JV ﬁrm levels.
A-14


===== [PAGE 58] =====

Table E.5: Knowledge Spillover by IQS and APEAL Scores
(1)
(2)
(3)
All
IQS
APEAL
JVScore
-0.001
-0.000
-0.001
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.002)
× SameGroup
0.016
0.008
0.025
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.018)
× SameSeg
-0.005***
-0.006***
-0.004**
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.002)
× SameGroup × SameSeg
0.087***
0.103***
0.072***
(0.018)
(0.026)
(0.024)
Observations
717,500
341,073
376,427
Partialling out:
Model-Year FE
✓
✓
✓
Dimension-Segment-Year FE
✓
✓
✓
Notes: The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model. We
consider all pairs of models produced by JVs and domestic automakers. The
unit of observation is a model pair-year-quality dimension. Column (1) repli-
cates the baseline speciﬁcation of Column (6) in Table 3. Columns (2) and (3)
split IQS and APEAL scores into diﬀerent regression samples. Standard errors
are clustered at follower ﬁrm-dimension and leader ﬁrm-dimension level. ***
implies signiﬁcance at 0.01 level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.
A-15


===== [PAGE 59] =====

Table E.6: Overlapping Customer Base
Dep. variable: log(count of top two choices + 1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
SameGroup
-0.034∗∗∗
-0.003
-0.009***
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
SameSegment
0.082∗∗∗
0.056∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)
SameGroup × SameSegment
-0.021∗∗∗
-0.017∗∗∗
(0.007)
(0.007)
SameOwnershipType
0.037∗∗∗
0.025∗∗∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
SameOwnershipType × SameSegment
0.132∗∗∗
0.130∗∗∗
(0.003)
(0.003)
SameFirm
0.051∗∗∗
0.041∗∗∗
(0.003)
(0.003)
Observations
196,225
196,225
196,225
R-squared
0.015
0.075
0.087
Attributes Controls
✓
Notes: The sample is constructed from the annual household vehicle ownership survey between 2009
and 2015. Each observation is a pair of models in a year. The dependent variable is the log number
of times that a pair is listed as the top two choices by households in the survey data.
Attribute
controls include diﬀerences in price, car size, and engine power. SameGroup and SameSeg are deﬁned
in Table 3. SameOwnershipType takes value 1 if both models within a pair are JV models or both are
domestic models. In Columns (2) and (3), the omitted group includes pairs not produced by aﬃliated
automakers, not in the same segment, and not produced by ﬁrms of the same ownership type. ***
implies signiﬁcance at the 0.01 level, ** at 0.05, and * at 0.1.
A-16


===== [PAGE 60] =====

Table E.7: Heterogeneity by Brand Association
(1)
(2)
JVScore
-0.006***
-0.006**
(0.002)
(0.002)
× SameGroup
0.114***
0.130***
(0.023)
(0.036)
× SameGroup × BrandAssociation
-0.089
(0.059)
Observations
138,540
138,540
Partialing out:
Model-Year FE
✓
✓
Segment-Dimension-Year FE
✓
✓
Notes: The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model.
The sample consists of domestic–JV pairs in the same vehicle segment.
The unit of observation is a pair-year-quality dimension. Both leader
(JV) and follower (domestic) scores are residualized scores after model-
year and segment-dimension-year ﬁxed eﬀects are partialed out. Brand
association is a standardized measure of the fraction of survey respon-
dents who recognize the JV in the pair. We describe the survey in Ap-
pendix B.
A-17
