

===== [p.1] =====
Review of Economic Studies (2026)
, 35–71
https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdaf024
Colluding Against Environmental 
Regulation
Jorge Al´e-Chilet
Universidad de Los Andes, Chile
Cuicui Chen
State University of New York at Albany, USA
Jing Li
Tufts University, USA
and 
Mathias Reynaert
Toulouse School of Economics, University of Toulouse Capitole, France
First version received April 2023; Editorial decision October 2024; Accepted April 2025 (Eds.)
We study collusion among firms against imperfectly monitored environmental regulation. Firms 
increase variable profits by violating regulation and reduce expected noncompliance penalties by vio- 
lating jointly. We consider a case of three German automakers colluding to reduce the effectiveness 
of emissions control technology. By estimating a structural model of the European automobile indus- 
try from 2007 to 2018, we find that collusion lowers expected noncompliance penalties substantially 
and increases buyer and producer surplus. Due to increased pollution, welfare decreases by e 1.57– 
5.57 billion. We show how environmental policy design and antitrust play complementary roles in 
preventing noncompliance.
Key words: Collusion, Regulation, Pollution, Automobile market, Noncompliance
JEL codes: L4, L5, L6, Q5
1. INTRODUCTION
Violation of environmental regulation is a pervasive problem (Duflo et al., 2018; Blundell et al., 
2020; Kang and Silveira, 2021; Reynaert and Sallee, 2021). Most studies on noncompliance 
assume that firms choose actions independently from competitors. In settings where the regulator 
has imperfect information for detecting and punishing noncompliance, theoretical studies by
Laffont and Martimort (1997, 2000) and Che and Kim (2006) have considered the possibility 
of agents colluding against the regulator. This paper considers firms colluding over compliance 
strategies to undermine regulation.
The editor in charge of this paper was Francesca Molinari.
35


===== [p.2] =====
36 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
Why may firms collude on noncompliance, and what are the welfare effects of such collu- 
sion? We study these questions in the context of an antitrust case. In July 2021, the European 
Commission found that German automakers BMW, Daimler, and Volkswagen (the “working 
group”) colluded to restrict the effectiveness of diesel emissions control technology (European 
Commission, 2021). Although the case did not involve collusive pricing, the Commission con- 
cluded for the first time that coordinating to limit technical development violates competition 
law.
Our analysis begins with a model that explores what firms can gain from participating in a 
coordinated scheme to reduce compliance. Firms face a pollution standard that is imperfectly 
enforced because of monitoring costs. Insufficient pollution abatement could result in non- 
compliance penalties, including fines, legal costs, and reputation damages. However, abatement 
increases firms’ marginal costs and compromises product attributes that consumers value. Vari- 
able profits thus decrease with a firm’s own abatement and increase with competitors’ abatement. 
A firm’s payoff is its variable profit minus the expected noncompliance penalty. Firms choose 
their pollution abatement either non-cooperatively or following a joint scheme.
The model shows that coordination on low abatement is only profitable when the expected 
penalties increase with other firms’ abatement choices. We provide three reasons why coordi- 
nated noncompliance may reduce expected penalties. First, penalties may decrease through the 
diffusion of responsibility: A penalty for a noncompliant firm may be lower when multiple vio- 
lators are caught. Second, coordination gives all participants “skin in the game,” which lowers 
the risk of a compliant competitor reporting the violation. Third, the probability of the regulator 
inspecting a firm can depend on how that firm’s abatement choice compares with other firms. 
The first and third reasons can be at play when a regulator considers multiple violators too big to 
fail and becomes reluctant to prosecute or impose steep penalties. Our model shows that antitrust 
can complement regulation by counteracting the reduction in the expected penalties and making 
coordinated noncompliance unattractive.
We apply our model to the EU antitrust case on diesel emissions control. In 2007, the EU 
announced a much stricter diesel NOx emission limit, the EU6 standard, to take effect in 2014. 
We take the EU emissions standards as given and study automakers’ compliance decisions.1
The compliance option for large diesel vehicles is a NOx control technology called Selective 
Catalytic Reduction (SCR). SCR requires a Diesel Exhaust Fluid (DEF) tank to neutralise NOx
emissions. The DEF tank takes up trunk space, which consumers value. The three German 
automakers communicated extensively through meetings and emails to agree on a “coordinated 
approach” to limit the DEF tank sizes (Dohmen and Hawranek, 2017). The firms designed DEF 
refills to coincide with the annual vehicle maintenance to reduce inconvenience for drivers. 
Given an annual refill, a smaller DEF tank means lower DEF consumption per mile driven and 
more NOx pollution.
Our data cover vehicle registrations, characteristics, and on-road emissions from the Euro- 
pean automobile market between 2007 and 2018. We observe detailed information on DEF tank 
sizes, emissions control systems, and trunk space, among other variables. On-road emissions 
test results reveal that diesel vehicles exceed the NOx standard by a factor of three on average, 
and more than 70% of the diesel vehicles are out of compliance. We observe an average DEF 
tank size of 16 liters. Based on the on-road emissions and engineering estimates, we compute 
the observed DEF tanks to be 13 liters smaller than what is required for compliance.
1. We abstract from two dynamic issues: firms can lobby ex-ante to change the stringency of standards, and 
policymakers can base regulation on past compliance. Our framework focuses on coordinated compliance choices to a 
regulation. We summarise all the effects of regulatory enforcement on future payoffs in the expected penalty term.


===== [p.3] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
37
We estimate a structural model of vehicle demand and marginal costs, incorporating abate- 
ment costs through DEF tank size choices. Large DEF tanks reduce variable profits by increasing 
marginal costs and taking up trunk space. Our demand estimates show that consumers are will- 
ing to pay e 231 to avoid the trunk space shrinkage from larger, compliant DEF tanks.2 Our 
marginal cost estimates show that the SCR system costs e 687, consistent with SCR system cost 
estimates from the engineering literature. Increasing the volume of the DEF tank by one liter is 
estimated to cost e 42. We do not find significant differences in DEF costs between the working 
group and other firms, which suggests that the collusive scheme did not induce cost efficien- 
cies for the working group. The antitrust case and supportive documents did not mention cost 
efficiencies either, nor were upstream DEF suppliers involved in the case.
The estimated variable profit functions and the participation constraints of collusion provide 
bounds for the expected noncompliance penalties of the working group. Estimating these bounds 
requires information on the DEF tank sizes that firms would have chosen without colluding. We 
present two approaches to quantifying this counterfactual non-cooperative equilibrium. First, we 
rely on the observation that non-working-group firms are not in the collusive scheme. Their non- 
cooperative choices imply first-order conditions that allow us to estimate the marginal expected 
noncompliance penalty function. Based on the estimated function, we compute the counter- 
factual equilibrium of DEF choices, where both non-working-group and working-group firms 
choose DEF sizes non-cooperatively. This procedure shows that the non-cooperative industry 
equilibrium would have been compliant. Collusion thus brings the whole industry into non- 
compliance. In a second approach, we use the descriptive evidence from our case to present a 
scenario in which the industry would be noncompliant in the non-cooperative equilibrium. In 
this scenario, collusion merely allows the working group to reduce their DEF tank sizes further 
below non-working-group firms’ choices. Given the range of non-cooperative scenarios derived 
from both the structural and descriptive approaches, we estimate that the expected noncompli- 
ance penalties for the working group are at least e 69–345 million lower due to coordinated 
noncompliance.
We discuss how the working group achieves such substantial expected penalty reductions 
in the EU automobile market. The EU sets the emissions standards, and member states enforce 
them. Enforcement at a lower level of government generates a too-big-to-fail setting. The Ger- 
man automobile industry is important for the German economy; for example, it employs 11% of 
manufacturing workers (ACEA, 2024). The working group may expect a national authority to 
be unwilling to punish widespread noncompliance. Furthermore, we find that coordinated non- 
compliance would diffuse 22–43% of reputation damages when working-group firms are caught 
together, give skin in the game to competitors whose stolen business would contribute to 25– 
47% of a single violator’s variable profit gain, and help mask otherwise suspiciously small DEF 
tanks.
The welfare effects of collusion against regulation are theoretically ambiguous. Environmen- 
tal regulation weighs market surplus against pollution externalities. Collusion could improve 
social welfare if the emissions standards were too stringent.3 In our empirical case, collusion 
increases industry profits and car buyer surplus due to larger trunk space and lower marginal 
costs. However, these benefits are outweighed by the cost of increased NOx pollution. Across
2. Monetary values are in 2018 euros throughout this paper.
3. The EU emissions standards have become increasingly stringent over time, and industry experts stated the EU 
6 standards would be too demanding for manufacturers.


===== [p.4] =====
38 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
the scenarios we consider, collusion against regulation reduced social welfare by e 1.57– 
5.57 billion. The Commission fined the cartel e 2.7 billion, which, based on our estimates, is 
sufficient to repair welfare.
Our work has three policy implications. First, we evaluate how the existing EU policy envi- 
ronment compares to a “collusion-proof” environment, where welfare-reducing collusion does 
not occur. Che and Kim (2006) argue that policymakers can make firms the residual claimant 
of the total surplus to achieve collusion-proofness. We find that when making the proposal 
to reduce abatement, the working group expected to pay at most 11% of the penalties speci- 
fied in a collusion-proof policy. Second, antitrust may have a complementary role in regulatory 
enforcement. To play this role in practice, antitrust would need to broaden its scope to be able to 
evaluate coordinated noncompliance and incorporate externality damages. Third, in the absence 
of antitrust, environmental policy design could consider the possibility that enforcement might 
create incentives for coordinated noncompliance.
This paper contributes to the regulatory enforcement literature by providing a theoretical 
and empirical framework for understanding coordinated noncompliance. The literature has con- 
sidered cases where the regulator faces either a single firm or a perfectly competitive industry, 
such as Duflo et al. (2018), Blundell et al. (2020), and Kang and Silveira (2021). This litera- 
ture shows that monitoring schemes and regulator discretion can make environmental regulation 
more robust to pollution hiding, but collusion among firms against the regulator has not been 
considered. We show that accounting for the possibility of collusion has important implications 
for environmental policy design and highlights a potential complementary role for antitrust.
Collusion against regulation has been considered in theoretical settings in Laffont and Mar- 
timort (1997, 2000), and Che and Kim (2006). The key vulnerability of regulation to collusion 
in Shleifer (1985), Auriol and Laffont (1992), Tanger˚as (2002), and Rai and Sj¨ostr¨om (2004)
is the ability of agents to coordinate on the information they report to the principal. Our analy- 
sis of collusion against regulation in an imperfectly competitive industry shows that information 
manipulation is not the only reason for collusion. Whenever the enforcement of regulation gen- 
erates sufficiently strong negative spillovers from firms’ compliance choices on other firms, a 
regulation becomes vulnerable to collusion.
We also contribute to the empirical literature on collusion. Most of this literature studies 
collusion in prices (e.g. Bresnahan, 1987) and quantities (e.g. Porter, 1983, and more recent work 
that structurally estimates incentives for such collusion Igami and Sugaya, 2022). Instead, we 
study collusion in a dimension other than prices and quantities, as in Al´e-Chilet and Atal (2020),
Gross (2020), Sullivan (2020), and Bourreau et al. (2021) (also see Nocke, 2007 for a theoretical 
analysis).4 The unique aspect of our paper is that firms collude on a product characteristic that 
is key to compliance with environmental regulation. Our focus on regulation adds complexity 
to the analysis because collusion interacts with expected noncompliance penalties and produces 
pollution damages. In contrast to coordination and standard-setting (such as in Shapiro, 2001;
Li, 2023), where social welfare hinges on whether firms coordinate, we study a case where social 
welfare also depends on which outcome firms jointly choose.
Lastly, our work adds to the literature on compliance issues in the automobile industry. 
Imperfect compliance in the European automobile sector, without collusion, has been studied in
4. The semi-collusion literature has mainly focused on settings where firms collude on prices and compete in 
other dimensions. Our case is the reverse, with collusion on technology and no evidence for price collusion. Explicit 
collusion on prices is known to be illegal and frequently prosecuted, while collusion on technology choices is less 
well-defined and rarely prosecuted. The working group consisted of engineers and operated separately from the pricing 
departments.


===== [p.5] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
39
Reynaert and Sallee (2021) and Reynaert (2021). A few papers analyse the effects of the Volk- 
swagen Dieselgate scandal in the US: Alexander and Schwandt (2022) and Holland et al. (2016)
on health outcomes, Bachmann et al. (2022) on reputation spillovers among German automak- 
ers, and Ater and Yoseph (2022) on the second-hand automobile market. The collusion we study 
predates the Volkswagen scandal.
We proceed as follows. Section 2 presents a model of coordinated noncompliance. Section
3 describes our data. Section 4 describes the empirical context and shows descriptive evidence 
for collusion and widespread noncompliance in the industry. Section 5 describes our empirical 
strategy for estimating vehicle demand and marginal costs and for bounding expected noncom- 
pliance penalties. Section 6 presents estimation results. Section 7 presents the welfare effects of 
collusion and discusses policy implications. We conclude in Section 8.
2. MODEL
We provide a model to understand firms’ regulatory compliance choices. The model shows 
that gains from coordinating on noncompliance stem from reductions in expected penalties. 
Antitrust reduces the benefits of participating in coordinated noncompliance and complements 
environmental regulation. The model provides estimable bounds that inform the structure of 
the expected noncompliance penalties. Finally, we describe the enforcement of coordinated 
noncompliance and the implications of coordination by a subgroup of firms on other firms.
2.1.
Individual abatement choices
Firms indexed by f ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n} face a regulation that aims to correct a negative externality. 
In response to the regulation, firms take abatement actions to reduce those externalities. Let
a ≡(a1, a2, . . . , an) represent the profile of those abatement actions in the industry. We do not 
model entry and assume that the regulation does not drive firms out of the market.
Each firm f receives a variable profit of π f (a). We assume that the variable profit is strictly 
decreasing in a firm’s own abatement action and strictly increasing in a competitor’s abate- 
ment action. This assumption rationalises regulation: no firm would abate absent the regulation. 
Abatement typically increases marginal costs or reduces quality by compromising product char- 
acteristics desirable to consumers. Firms who abate little, therefore, steal business from those 
who abate more.
For each firm f, let a∗
f denote the minimal abatement action that would be sufficient for it 
to comply with the regulation. If firm f chooses an abatement action below a∗
f , the firm is out 
of compliance. We assume away information asymmetry among firms. The regulator is at an 
information disadvantage relative to the firms. The regulator observes firms’ abatement actions 
but not the degree to which those abatement actions reduce externalities towards compliance.5
As a result, a noncompliant firm probabilistically incurs penalties (such as regulatory fines and 
reputation damages). The regulator inspects firm f with probability Pf (a) to reveal its com- 
pliance status. If inspected, the firm incurs a noncompliance penalty K f (a) ≥0. We allow the 
probability and the penalty to depend on other firms’ abatement choices. We discuss multi- 
ple reasons for this dependency below. We denote firm f’s expected noncompliance penalty
5. One can conceptualise this as each firm having a pollution type θ f and abatement a f . Emissions are deter- 
mined by e f = θ f −a f . The regulator sets an emission standard e∗. The regulator observes a f but not θ f . Firms can 
misreport emissions to the regulator and enter the market with e f > e∗. We assume that misreporting in itself is not 
costly, but noncompliant firms risk penalties. Putting the regulator at an information disadvantage relative to the industry 
is consistent with the regulation literature, e.g. Weitzman (1974) and Baron and Myerson (1982).


===== [p.6] =====
40 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
as EK f (a) ≡Pf (a)K f (a) and use EK f (a f , a−f ) to define the expected penalty when firm f
would play a f while the other firms are at a profile a−f .
Firm f’s payoff at the industry abatement profile a is π f (a) −EK f (a). We define the abate- 
ment profile aN as the non-cooperative equilibrium. We denote a∗as the profile where each firm 
exactly complies with the standard. Noncompliance penalties are zero when firms comply or 
overcomply: EK f (a f , ·) = 0 for a f ≥a∗
f . Because variable profits are decreasing in abatement, 
it follows that over-compliance is a dominated action, and hence, there is no overcompliance in 
the non-cooperative equilibrium aN ≤a∗.
2.2.
Coordinated abatement choices
A working group proposes a profile of abatement actions a J.6 The proposal is accepted if and 
only if all firms agree to it. The working group can enforce the joint decision—we discuss this 
below in Section 2.3. Firms participating in the scheme may risk antitrust scrutiny. We define
EA f ≥0 as the expected antitrust penalty a firm assigns to participating. The expected antitrust 
penalty EA f is separate from EK f (a), because EA f applies only when firms coordinate to play
a = a J, while EK f (a) applies whenever firms are noncompliant. Additionally, antitrust and 
regulatory penalties are usually determined by different governmental agencies.
Firm f considers whether to accept the joint proposal based on its participation constraint:
π f (a J) −EK f (a J) −EA f (a J) ≥π f (aN) −EK f (aN),
(1)
showing that the profits from coordinating need to be higher than the non-cooperative profits 
to achieve participation. The participation constraint reveals a complementary role for antitrust 
in enforcing regulation. When firms expect higher antitrust penalties, EA f , a working group is 
less likely to be able to make a profitable proposal that would reduce abatement and increase 
pollution.
Without the joint proposal, firms would play aN, the non-cooperative equilibrium. By the 
definition of a non-cooperative equilibrium, firm f would obtain a lower payoff by unilaterally 
deviating from aN 
f to a J 
f :
π f (aN) −EK f (aN) ≥π f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −EK f (a J 
f , aN
−f ).
(2)
Together (1) and (2) reveal that if a proposal is accepted, it must be that coordinating is more 
profitable than not coordinating, which in turn is more profitable than abating a J 
f unilaterally.
A working group may propose abatement actions that can be lower or higher than the non- 
cooperative abatement choices. Proposition 1 states that if firms accept a coordinated profile 
proposal that lowers abatement, this must imply that the expected penalty increases with other 
firms’ abatement:
Proposition 1. If firm f chooses to participate in a joint proposal that decreases compliance 
(a J < aN), then EK f (a J) < EK f (a J 
f , aN
−f ). The difference between these expected penalties 
is bounded below by the difference in the firm’s variable profit:
EK f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −EK f (a J) ≥π f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −π f (a J).
(3)
6. Not all firms may receive the working group’s proposal. In Section 2.4, we discuss the incentives of firms not 
included in the proposal.


===== [p.7] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
41
Proof: Since firm f chooses to participate in the joint proposal, its participation constraint 
defined in (1) must hold. Without the joint proposal, firms would play aN, the non-cooperative 
equilibrium defined in (2). Combining (1) and (2) yields:
π f (a J) −EK f (a J) −EA f (a J) ≥π f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −EK f (a J 
f , aN
−f ).
(4)
Rearranging the terms, we have EK f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −EK f (a J) ≥π f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −π f (a J) +
EA f (a J) ≥π f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −π f (a J) because EA f (a J) ≥0. We have thus established Inequality 
(3). Since the variable profit is strictly increasing in a competitor’s abatement action, aN
−f > a J
−f
implies that π f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −π f (a J) > 0. Therefore, EK f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −EK f (a J) > 0.
□
To gain intuition behind Proposition 1, observe that the acceptance of a collusive proposal 
to lower abatement reveals that abatement imposes negative spillovers on other firms. Collu- 
sion increases payoffs by limiting these negative spillovers from abatement. A firm’s payoff is 
the variable profit minus the expected noncompliance penalty. Because variable profits increase 
with competitors’ abatement, the source of negative spillovers must be the expected noncom- 
pliance penalty.7 This is what Proposition 1 concludes: the expected penalty that a firm incurs 
must increase (and the firm’s total payoff decrease) as other firms increase their abatement.8 In 
our empirical analysis of the case where automakers coordinated to limit emissions control tech- 
nology, we quantify the strength of these negative spillovers in expected penalties by bounding 
them from below with the estimated positive spillovers in variable profits.
We now discuss three reasons why coordinated noncompliance can reduce expected non- 
compliance penalties.9
First, reputation damages included in the noncompliance penalty K f can decrease when 
several firms are caught noncompliant. Such “diffusion of responsibility” can also arise from a 
too-big-to-fail argument. Upon detection of widespread noncompliance, enforcing the regulation 
would result in industry-wide fines, which the regulator might be reluctant to impose because of 
adverse economic effects. Second, when a firm violates the regulation by choosing noncompli- 
ance, our variable profit assumption implies that the firm will steal profits from compliant firms. 
This business-stealing effect creates a risk that honest competitors might report the noncompli- 
ance to the regulator. By jointly choosing noncompliance, competitors get “skin in the game:” 
noncompliant competitors have less incentive to report noncompliance, thereby reducing Pf . 
Third, the probability of detecting a firm’s noncompliance can decrease when other firms are 
noncompliant. The regulator may infer the sufficiency of a firm’s abatement action by compar- 
ing it to other firms’ abatement actions.10 If the regulator uses yardstick competition (Shleifer, 
1985) and makes inspection decisions based on the observations of firms’ abatement actions, 
firms can manipulate the regulator’s information by coordinating abatement actions (Tanger˚as,
7. Appendix A3 formalises how the direction of the joint proposal depends on the signs of spillovers in the 
variable profit and expected penalty functions.
8. We compare EK f (a J) and EK f (a J 
f , aN
−f ), but it is important to note the comparison does not follow from 
having firms other than f strategically change their choices from a J
−f to aN
−f . Proposition 1 is a statement about 
spillovers between firms’ expected noncompliance penalty function revealed by collusion. The proof relies on the 
participation constraint and the definition of the non-cooperative Nash profile from firm f’s perspective.
9. Appendix A2 presents a simple two-by-two example to illustrate each channel. These channels do not need to 
be present simultaneously to reduce expected penalties.
10. Earnhart and Friesen (2021) provide evidence that the US Environmental Protection Agency inspectors 
implement this “competitive endogenous audit” mechanism, where firms that appear less compliant than similar 
regulated firms are subject to more intensive audits.


===== [p.8] =====
42 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
2002). This “reduction in the detection probability” channel can also arise from the too-big- 
to-fail argument. A regulator might be disinclined to start investigating when an investigation 
would reveal industry-wide noncompliance.11
2.3.
Enforcement of joint decisions
Our model has so far been agnostic about how the working group enforces the joint abatement 
decisions. In contrast to collusion on prices, deviation from the collusive noncompliance scheme 
leads to lower variable profits. Deviation incentives arise if a colluding firm, by unilaterally 
increasing abatement, reduces its expected noncompliance penalty by more than the reduction 
in its variable profit. Because we do not observe the data to quantify cartel enforcement in 
response to deviations, our framework focuses on the participation decision of working group 
members and is, therefore, not explicitly dynamic.12 Appendix A1 elaborates on the dynamic 
cartel enforcement and whistle-blower incentives.
2.4.
Coordination by a subgroup of firms
Not all firms in the market may receive a joint noncompliance proposal from the working 
group. We now discuss the incentives of firms that are not part of the scheme.13 We assume 
that non-working-group firms observe whether the proposal is accepted before making abate- 
ment choices.14 If the proposal is accepted, the non-working-group firms condition on the 
proposal while choosing non-cooperative abatement actions. For notational convenience, we 
include those actions in the profile a J. If the proposal is not accepted, all firms choose actions 
non-cooperatively, aN.
Observing a noncompliant choice by a non-working-group firm g, a J 
g < a∗
g, implies that a 
unilateral deviation from a J 
g to a∗
g would make the firm worse off:
πg(a J) −EKg(a J) ≥πg(a∗
g, a J
−g),
(5)
where we have used Kg(a∗
g, ·) = 0. This inequality implies that firm g’s expected noncom- 
pliance penalty at a J is at most πg(a J) −πg(a∗
g, a J
−g). By following the working group into 
noncompliance, a non-working-group firm increases its variable profit more than it increases 
the expected noncompliance penalty. The same three reasons outlined above can explain why 
the non-working-group firms expect penalty reductions when they follow suit. We estimate the 
upper bound on non-working-group firms’ expected noncompliance penalties in our empirical 
case in Section 6.
11. Firms may also have the power to affect the regulation directly through successful lobbying. Analyzing this 
possibility is beyond the scope of this paper.
12. A recent empirical contribution by Igami and Sugaya (2022) estimates incentives to collude in the context of 
collusion on prices. Their setting allows quantification of the punishment from a reversal to Nash pricing.
13. We take the membership in the working group as exogenous. In our empirical context, the firms included in 
the working group are all German and have long-established cooperation on engineering and R&D choices.
14. Section 3 reports that the working group had introduced a small number of noncompliant vehicles in the 
years before the emission standard took effect. We interpret this as the working group communicating their acceptance 
of a proposal to non-working-group firms.


===== [p.9] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
43
3. DATA
Our vehicle sales and price data are from a market research firm (JATO Dynamics). The data 
contain new registrations, retail prices, and attributes of all passenger vehicles sold in seven 
European markets (Germany, UK, France, The Netherlands, Belgium, Spain, Italy), representing 
90% of the European market. Our sample period starts in 2007, which captures the working 
group’s earliest adoption of Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) to control NOx. We end our 
sample in 2018 when the large majority of vehicles registered were still approved for Euro 6 
emission standards under the New European Driving Cycle (NEDC) and before the Volkswagen 
Dieselgate scandal began to affect vehicle designs.15
We augment the JATO data with data from ADAC, a German automobile association.16 The 
ADAC data provide information on NOx control technology, Diesel Exhaust Fluid (DEF) tank 
size, trunk space, and designations of series and series generation. We define a vehicle as a 
combination of brand, engine displacement, horsepower, body type, fuel type, transmission, 
trunk space, emissions control technology, emission standards, and (when applicable) DEF tank 
size.
Additional data include the location and plant of production of each vehicle from PwC Auto- 
facts; population, GDP, price indices, and input costs from statistical agencies; and Real Driving 
Emissions (RDE) data from Emissions Analytics, an independent testing and data company. The 
company conducted a thousand tests on on-road NOx emissions between 2011 and 2020.
In our sample period 2007–2018, the EU automobile industry consists of the working-group 
firms—BMW, Daimler, and Volkswagen—and 21 other firms.17 The working group accounts 
for about half of the sales revenue in our sample. The diesel segment is an important source of 
revenue for the working group. In 2017, the working group generated e 81 billion in revenue 
from diesel vehicles and e 55 billion from gasoline vehicles, compared with e 78 billion and
e 72 billion for non-working-group firms, respectively.
4. EMPIRICAL CONTEXT
4.1.
EU regulation of automobile NOx emissions
Road transport generates about 40% of nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions in the EU, of which 80% 
come from diesel vehicles (European Environment Agency, 2015). NOx is a family of poisonous 
gases with adverse environmental and human health effects.18 Vehicle emission standards are a 
common government tool to reduce tailpipe emissions.19
15. We describe the details of the Euro 6 emission standards, the NEDC, and the Volkswagen Dieselgate scandal 
in Section 4.
16. Vehicle models available in Germany cover almost all vehicles available in other European countries, though 
aesthetic trims and packages may vary across countries. We match 93% of observations (or 96% of registrations) in the 
JATO data with the detailed characteristics data from ADAC.
17. In our study period, BMW owns BMW and MINI, and Volkswagen owns Audi, Bentley, Lamborghini, 
Porsche, SEAT, Skoda, and VW.
18. NOx combines with atmospheric chemicals to form fine particulate matter (PM2.5). NOx also produces 
smog-causing ground-level ozone when combined with volatile organic compounds and sunlight. In 2015, the global 
death toll of PM2.5 through heart disease, stroke, lung cancer, chronic lung disease, and respiratory infections was 
4.2 million; ground-level ozone accounted for an additional 0.25 million deaths (Health Effects Institute, 2017). NOx
reduces crop and forest productivity, leads to more CO2 in the atmosphere, and interacts with water to form acid rain.
19. Jacobsen et al. (2023) show that emission standards have caused substantial reductions in air pollution from 
transport in the US.


===== [p.10] =====
44 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
Since 2000, the EU has adopted increasingly stringent NOx emission standards for diesel 
vehicles. The emission standards relevant to our analysis are Euro 6 (2014–). The change from 
the Euro 5 to the Euro 6 standards required carmakers to more than halve NOx emissions for 
diesel vehicles from 0.18 g/km to 0.08 g/km. Appendix Figure A2 shows this change brought 
the EU NOx emission standard closer to the more stringent one of the US. The EU implements 
the standards using a “type approval” procedure. Automakers typically receive one year to type- 
approve vehicles before the standard binds. For example, type approval requires Euro 6 from 
September 2014 onward, and new vehicle registrations require Euro 6 from September 2015 
onward. A vehicle “type” can only enter the market if it passes the emissions test conducted 
by a third-party testing company. While the EU sets the emission standards, the member states 
oversee the type approval procedure and enforce the emission standards.
The Euro 6 emissions limits were announced in 2007. Given the long gap between the 
announcement and the implementation of the regulation, our framework focuses on firm 
behaviour in response to a fixed regulation. The vehicles affected by the collusion were tested 
under the New European Driving Cycle (NEDC) procedure. Starting in 2017, the EU changed 
the testing procedure several times to better reflect real driving emissions (RDE). The World- 
wide Harmonised Light Vehicle Test Procedure (WLTP) is the current testing procedure. We end 
our study in 2018 when most new vehicles registered were still approved under NEDC.
4.2.
Abatement responses to NOx emission standards
To meet Euro 6 emission standards, automakers adopted Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) 
in passenger diesel vehicles, a technology already used in trucks. SCR has virtually no perfor- 
mance penalty on vehicles and is suitable for larger vehicles. SCR requires a tank to hold Diesel 
Exhaust Fluid (DEF), a urea solution sprayed into engine-out emissions. DEF neutralises NOx
into harmless water and nitrogen. An alternative to SCR is Lean NOx Trap (LNT), which reduces 
fuel efficiency and is more suitable for small vehicles. Further, SCR and LNT can be combined 
to achieve more effective emissions control, but this option is less common.
While trucks refill their DEF tanks frequently, automakers designed DEF tanks in passen- 
ger cars to have annual refills. A full tank of DEF was supposed to last for a year of driving 
for two reasons. First, automakers were wary of burdening consumers with the hassle of refill- 
ing the DEF tank more frequently than annual check-ups. They wanted to avoid making diesel 
cars less attractive than gasoline cars.20 Second, during the years of our study, passenger car 
owners found it challenging to refill DEF tanks themselves. The refilling infrastructure had been 
designed for trucks, and tune-ups would be needed after refills.21 Because each DEF tank pro- 
vides DEF for a year of driving, we can convert the tank size to “dosage,” defined as the ratio of 
the DEF tank size to the amount of diesel that sustains one year of driving. The term dosage is
20. Dohmen and Hawranek (2017) report that the manufacturers’ internal records show that DEF tanks are 
“designed so that customers would not have to refill them.” and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency explicitly 
“demanded that the tanks contain enough urea to ensure that they would only have to be refilled during an inspection after 
about 16,000 kilometers. They were unwilling to accept the possibility that the tanks could be refilled between inspec- 
tion dates[. . . ].” Ewing and Granville (2019) write that “refilling the tank would become an extra chore and expense for 
the owner, a potential turnoff for prospective customers,” and that “Volkswagen wanted the fluid to last long enough to 
be refilled by dealers during regularly scheduled oil changes, so there would be no inconvenience to owners.”
21. Total, a fuel station brand, advises consumers against refilling themselves, pointing out that the DEF filler 
neck on the vehicle may be hard to access, that DEF pumps at gas stations are designed specifically for trucks but not 
passenger vehicles, and that many vehicles need a technical reset by a mechanic after the DEF refill. Likewise, on their 
website, Jaguar asks consumers to book a refill with an authorised repairer when the vehicle alerts that DEF levels are 
critically low. Persistent URLs in Appendix.


===== [p.11] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
45
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1 
Adoption of Euro 6 and DEF tanks in large diesel vehicles (a) Euro 6 share. (b) DEF share.
Notes: Subfigure (a) presents the share of large diesel vehicle registrations with Euro 6 type approval; Subfigure (b) presents the share 
of large diesel vehicle registrations with a DEF tank. The reference lines mark September 2015, after which all new registrations must 
comply with Euro 6.
used in the engineering literature to measure the effectiveness of SCR systems. The amount of 
diesel a vehicle consumes annually depends on a vehicle’s fuel efficiency and a driver’s mileage. 
Increasing dosage corresponds to increased DEF tank size when considering a specific vehicle, 
mileage, and refill frequency. Therefore, we focus on DEF tank size and dosages as measures of 
the efficiency of the DEF system for a given vehicle.
Figure 1 depicts the adoption of Euro 6 emission standards and DEF tanks in new large diesel 
vehicle registrations.22 The reference line marks September 2015, the Euro 6 implementation 
date for registrations. Subfigure (a) depicts the share of large diesel registrations with Euro 6 
type approval. The share of Euro 6 registrations increases gradually in the years leading up to 
the Euro 6 implementation deadline, reaching 100% after the deadline. Subfigure (b) depicts 
the share of large diesel registrations with a DEF tank; it increases leading up to the Euro 6 
implementation deadline as vehicle models with Euro 6 type approval enter. DEF market shares 
continue to increase after the Euro 6 implementation deadline as more DEF models enter and 
non-DEF models exit. The specific adoption of DEF tanks in response to Euro 6 shows that 
firms respond to the regulation and at least signal compliance steps to the regulator. The firms 
choose DEF as their primary compliance technology in response to Euro 6. However, despite 
widespread DEF adoption, low dosages might still lead to insufficient compliance. Below, we 
discuss the dosages and efficiency of the DEF systems.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of DEF tank sizes on SCR-only vehicles in the industry.23
The observed tank sizes are dispersed, ranging from 8 liters to 38 liters, showing the automakers 
did not coordinate on a uniform DEF tank size.
22. We define large diesel vehicles as having at least 1.8 liters engines. The sample median is 1.97 liters. 
Appendix Table A2 shows that DEF tanks are installed on larger and more powerful vehicles, consistent with Yang
et al. (2015).
23. Because LNT reduces emissions, DEF tank sizes on vehicles with both SCR and LNT are not comparable to 
those with SCR only.


===== [p.12] =====
46 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
FIGURE 2 
Distribution of DEF tank sizes in SCR-only vehicles, 2007–18
Notes: Figure plots the frequency distribution of the DEF tank sizes in liters observed in vehicles registered between 2007 and 2018.
4.3.
Imperfect enforcement
It is difficult for a regulator to know the precise DEF dosage a vehicle needs to comply with 
the Euro 6 standards. Automakers have proprietary engine tuning technologies that manage the 
combustion process and determine engine-out emissions. Those engine-out emissions then inter- 
act with the SCR system. Tailpipe emissions are determined by a complex process involving 
a catalyst and its temperature, engine load, altitude, speed, and driving dynamics (European 
Commission, 2021).
The regulator does not observe engine-out emissions directly and has to measure tailpipe 
emissions. In our sample period, the EU relied on NEDC tests, consisting exclusively of lab 
measurement, to monitor Euro 6 compliance.24
Monitoring is further complicated due to defeat devices. The 2015 Volkswagen Dieselgate 
scandal in the US revealed the use of defeat devices to circumvent emission standards. These 
devices consist of sensors to identify testing conditions and software that artificially reduces 
vehicle emissions in lab testing. With defeat devices, automakers could obtain type approval for 
vehicles that were not compliant with emission standards on the road.
An inquiry by the EU Parliament (Gieseke and Gerbandy, 2017) revealed deficiencies in the 
enforcement of EU emission standards. First, the inquiry describes the inconsistent application 
of EU law across member states regarding exemptions for defeat devices (Art. 33). Second, it 
points out that member states contravened their legal obligation to monitor the ban on defeat 
devices (Art. 34). Third, the inquiry blames the member states and the European Commission for 
maladministration and failing to understand the discrepancy between lab and on-road emissions 
(Art. 36–42).
The Parliamentary inquiry also calls upon member states to impose the EU rules on their 
domestic automobile industry. However, given the national importance of these industries, a
24. Accurate measurement of tailpipe emissions would require testing vehicles on the road. On-road testing with 
portable emissions measurement systems attached to the vehicle accurately reflects emissions from the driving conditions 
of each individual test. However, while in-lab tests are generally reproducible, on-road tests were difficult and costly to 
incorporate into regulation due to uncontrolled variability from the driver, traffic, and weather. The EU implemented on- 
road testing only with the change from NEDC to WLTP in 2018, when on-road testing technology became more mature 
and available.


===== [p.13] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
47
“too-big-to-fail” mechanism might be at play, whereby the member states are reluctant to enforce 
EU standards strictly to avoid damaging their domestic industry.25
The regulatory environment is thus characterised by weak monitoring and legal uncertainty 
about what constitutes a defeat device, making it possible for firms to risk a noncompliance 
strategy without the certainty of getting caught. Although vehicles may be legally compliant 
based on in-lab tests, they exceed emissions limits on the road. This paper defines compliance 
as actual emission reductions on the road, in line with the goal of the EU regulation to reduce 
pollution.
Despite imperfect enforcement, automakers still may face consequences for noncompliance. 
The discovery of defeat devices and the resulting attention on on-road emissions negatively 
affected automakers for several reasons. First, automakers face a series of ongoing lawsuits by 
consumer groups and shareholders for dishonesty. Second, the discovery of high diesel pollution 
causes reputation damage for the diesel segment and for the brands that engage in dishonest 
behaviour. Third, the use of defeat devices is legally dubious in the EU, and several countries 
have started legal investigations into the practice.
4.4.
The antitrust case
The European Commission found guilty and fined BMW, Daimler, and Volkswagen in July 2021 
for forming a cartel that restricted emission control technology (European Commission, 2021). 
Since the 1990s, engineers of the firms in the working group have met regularly to discuss 
different technologies and engine specifications (Dohmen and Hawranek, 2017).
The decision of the antitrust case documents the coordination from internal meeting notes. 
It is striking that the firms recorded their coordination; we think this behaviour might mean 
that firms were not expecting to be the subject of an antitrust investigation, so that the firms’ 
expected antitrust penalty (EA in our model in Section 2) may be zero. The antitrust case is the 
first concluded case that has ruled technology coordination violated EU competition law.
As early as 2006, the working group discussed fitting a DEF tank in future models.26 Accord- 
ing to an internal working-group report, after the failure of an initial agreement to effectively 
limit the DEF tank sizes, the automakers sensed the “urgent need for cooperation.” They pres- 
sured their managers to hold additional meetings and reach an agreement. Although larger 
DEF tanks reduce more NOx, the chassis managers preferred smaller tanks because they were 
“lightweight, did not cost much, and left enough space for golf bags in the trunk” (Dohmen and 
Hawranek, 2017). Moreover, none of the companies wanted to make customers refill DEF tanks 
more than once a year. The firms thus coordinated to limit tank sizes and refill ranges. There is 
no evidence for explicit coordination on noncompliance and defeat devices. However, the firms 
allegedly knew smaller tanks would not contain enough DEF to reduce NOx emissions and be 
compliant with Euro 6. A 2011 internal report stated that Euro 6 would require large DEF tanks 
to increase DEF consumption by 50 percent (Ewing, 2018). By explicitly coordinating on DEF 
tank size and refill frequency, the firms implicitly coordinated on noncompliance.
In May 2014, Audi sent an email warning that the increased DEF injection required by Euro 
6 could necessitate the costly adoption of larger DEF tanks. Such communication and the ini- 
tially stated need for cooperation in 2007 show that individual automakers seem to have had
25. The German industry employs 11% of the German manufacturing workforce (ACEA, 2024), there is strong 
evidence of revolving doors between the German government and the automotive industry (Joshua Posaner and Flo- 
rian Muller, 2017), and German policymakers have openly tried to delay and reduce the stringency of EU emission 
regulations during the legislative process (Gearino, 2020).
26. Note that the coordination took place well before the 2015 Volkswagen Dieselgate scandal.


===== [p.14] =====
48 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
the incentive to deviate to larger DEF tanks unilaterally. The firms communicate that DEF tanks 
should increase in size to attain compliance.
The cartel potentially had to enforce their proposal to limit tank sizes. The long-term R&D 
relationship among the cartel members allows the cartel to punish deviant firms by excluding 
them from future R&D collaborations. Because R&D collaboration is not public information, 
we do not empirically estimate cartel punishment and instead focus on participation in the cartel.
In October 2017, the European Commission began initial inquiries into possible collusion by 
inspecting the premises of BMW, Daimler, and Volkswagen in Germany. After the initial inquiry, 
Daimler and, soon afterward, Volkswagen applied for leniency to become whistle-blowers. Both 
firms blew the whistle because the inquiry into documents related to the ongoing Volkswagen 
emission scandal in the US was likely to uncover their agreement. Our framework focuses on 
quantifying the ex-ante risk firms placed on the exposure of their collusion at the time of the 
participation decision. The escalation in antitrust risk following the exposure of the Volkswagen 
scandal is beyond the scope of this paper.27
In April 2019, the Commission sent a statement of objections to the working group with 
the preliminary view that the working group “participated in a collusive scheme, in breach of 
EU competition rules, to limit the development and roll-out of emission cleaning technology 
[. . . ]” (European Commission, 2019). The investigation concluded in July 2021, and the EC 
found the working group guilty of violating Article 101(1) of the Treaty and Article 53(1) of 
the EEA Agreement, European Commission (2021). The firms were convicted of forming a 
cartel that restricted competition in the EU by coordinating their emissions control technology. 
The Commission argues that automakers colluded not to provide abatement beyond regulatory 
requirements, which could be interpreted as if the non-cooperative equilibrium would be one 
with over-compliance and that collusion limited the industry to compliance. This is at odds 
with the evidence of on-road noncompliance we present below. The Commission is restricted to 
implementing EU antitrust law and does not have jurisdiction over environmental regulation. The 
authority to determine noncompliance lies within the purview of individual member states. We 
interpret the Commission’s argumentation as sufficient to show a violation of EU competition 
law without adjudicating on behalf of member states what constitutes environmental compliance.
The European Commission set a fine of e 2.7 billion for limiting the sizes of their DEF 
tanks in diesel cars and coordinating their refill ranges. The automakers received lower fines 
in practice after a 20% novelty discount and a 10% settlement discount. The novelty discount 
was given because this is the first case of technology cooperation being ruled a cartel. BMW 
received a e 373 million fine, and Volkswagen received a e 502 million fine (including an addi- 
tional leniency discount of 45% for cooperating with the investigation). Daimler avoided a total 
fine of e 727 million for being the first whistle-blower.
4.5.
Evidence for widespread noncompliance
The EC closed its case based on the proven communication among the firms to attempt to reduce 
the size of the DEF tanks, but it did not make statements about the actual market effects of the 
coordination. We study DEF dosages to investigate if carmakers restricted the emissions control 
systems below the EU standards.
27. An EU antitrust expert shared the view that the whistle-blowing status was misused in this case because the 
firms would have been exposed anyway. The whistle-blowing was still useful in enabling the European Commission to 
close the case in a settlement.


===== [p.15] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
49
FIGURE 3 
Distributions of DEF dosages by the working group and other Firms
Notes: Box plot based on all diesel SCR vehicles (NEDC and WLTP) approved for Euro 6. Dosage equals DEF tank size divided by the 
fuel consumption for an annual mileage of 20,000 km. Lines within the box plot indicate the median. Box edges represent the 25th and 
75th percentiles. End points represent the lower and upper adjacent values. Outside values are omitted.
Using our data, we plot in Figure 3 the distributions of DEF dosages adopted by the working 
group and other firms. We convert DEF tank sizes to dosages by dividing the former by the 
annual fuel consumption. To obtain the annual fuel consumption for each vehicle, we multiply 
an annual average mileage of 20,000 km with the vehicle-specific fuel consumption (liter per km 
driven).28 Figure 3 shows that the working group sold SCR vehicles as early as 2009 before the 
Euro 6 emission standards took effect. The number of these early SCR vehicles was small: the 
working group introduced an average of 12 SCR vehicles per year before 2014, compared with 
137 afterward. Except for a single vehicle in 2011, all other firms introduce SCR vehicles after 
Euro 6. The interquartile values of the working group’s dosages are between 0.7% and 2.4%. 
The interquartile ranges of their dosages are consistently below those of other firms until 2018. 
Appendix Table A3 reports regressions of log DEF dosages on the working group indicator 
and finds that the working group adopts, on average, 8% lower dosages than other firms for 
SCR vehicles approved under NEDC. Contrarily, the working group has a higher dosage for 
WLTP-approved vehicles. This explains the narrowing of the dosage gap towards 2018, shown 
in Figure 3 as the share of WLTP vehicles starts to increase.
We now assess whether those dosage choices are sufficient for Euro 6 compliance under 
NEDC. To do so, we first use the RDE data to estimate the relationship between DEF choices 
and on-road NOx emissions. The on-road emission for vehicle j, measured in mg/km, is:
e j = n jκ −Removal Rate × a j + υ j,
(6)
where n jκ is the part of vehicle j’s engine-out emission that is explained by a large set of control 
variables n j including fuel consumption and the presence of a supplementary LNT system, υ j is
28. The UK travel survey reports that diesels travel 17,200 km per year on average, see National Travel Sur- 
vey Table NTS0902, whereas based on odometer readings, the Dutch statistical agency reports diesel vehicles travel 
on average 23,000 km per year, see Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek, “Dienst voor het wegverkeer, gemiddelde 
jaarkilometrage.”


===== [p.16] =====
50 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
TABLE 1
Determinants of on-road emissions, mg/km
(1)
(2)
DEF Size (L)
−8.19
−7.71
(2.03)
(3.63)
LNT+SCR Relative to SCR
−109.39
−72.18
(50.55)
(58.87)
On-road Fuel Consumption (l/100 km)
68.35
69.06
(35.03)
(31.02)
Euro 6 Cycle
Both
NEDC
Controls
X
X
N
143
90
Adjusted R2
0.338
0.374
Notes: An observation is a diesel SCR vehicle approved for Euro 6 in the on-road emission dataset. Controls include 
the brand fixed effects, power, vehicle segment fixed effects, number of cylinders, curb weight, ambient temperature, 
ambient pressure, and relative humidity. Standard errors clustered at the brand level are in parentheses.
the i.i.d. idiosyncratic part of j’s engine-out emission, and a j is the DEF tank size. The parameter 
of interest is RemovalRate, describing how much a liter of DEF neutralises NOx.29
Table 1 reports the regression results using equation (6) based on the RDE test results. 
Column (1) shows that emissions decrease with the DEF tank size and the presence of a supple- 
mentary LNT system and increase with fuel consumption. Because the collusion affected NEDC 
vehicles, we restrict to this subsample in Column (2) and estimate the DEF removal rate to be 
7.71 mg/km per liter of DEF.
We then use the estimated relationship in (6) to calculate a counterfactual DEF size for each 
vehicle such that it is compliant with the emission limit of 80 mg/km. We find that the average 
compliant dosage for NEDC vehicles in our RDE dataset would be 2.7%. This average com- 
pliant dosage is much higher than the average observed dosage of 1.67% and exceeds the 75th 
percentile of observed dosages shown in the top panel of Table 2. Correspondingly, the RDE 
test results show that those vehicles emitted, on average, three times the NOx emission limit on 
the road and that almost three-quarters of the tested models emit more than the emission limit. 
Engineering studies on the potential of SCR to help achieve Euro 6 compliance corroborate our 
compliance calculations.30 Following these studies, we adopt 3% as the dosage needed for com- 
pliance. Our appendix reports robustness using a 2%-scenario in favour of automakers and a “3% 
plus”-scenario that increases the fuel consumption ratings by 30% to account for on-road fuel 
consumption for EU vehicles being higher than official fuel consumption (Reynaert and Sallee, 
2021).
We apply the compliant dosages informed by the RDE dataset to our main dataset that cov- 
ers the universe of NEDC SCR models available in the seven representative European markets. 
Comparing the actual choices of DEF tank sizes with our computed compliant sizes shows 
widespread noncompliance in the industry. Panel B in Table 2 shows that the implied dosage 
of the DEF tank sizes on all NEDC vehicles in our main dataset is, on average, 1.71%. DEF tank
29. We use a linear relationship between emission and DEF tank size. In our sample, we have no observations 
with zero emissions after SCR treatment (at which point additional DEF cannot abate because emissions cannot be 
negative), and we find no statistical evidence for a nonlinear relationship between a j and e j.
30. Holderbaum et al. (2015) test a vehicle with different NOx treatment systems and conclude that compliance in 
real driving conditions requires DEF dosages between 2.9% and 3.6%. The study tested vehicles with fuel consumption 
of 6.8 liters/100 km and reports DEF usage of 2 to 2.5 liters/1,000 km to obtain compliance. Similarly, Op De Beeck
et al. (2013) report a compliant dosage of 3%, and Sala et al. (2018) report 3–5%.


===== [p.17] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
51
TABLE 2
DEF tank size, dosage, and NOx exceedance factor
Mean
St.Dev.
Min
25th Per.
75th Per.
Max
% Noncompliant
Panel A: Real Driving Emissions Dataset
Observed DEF size (L)
16.42
6.40
8.00
12.00
17.00
33.40
Implied dosage (%)
1.67
0.58
0.81
1.25
2.14
3.21
NOx exceedance factor
2.99
2.62
0.12
0.99
3.88
13.76
73.8
Panel B: Main Dataset
Observed DEF tank size (L)
16.27
5.22
8.00
12.00
17.00
38.70
Implied dosage (%)
1.70
0.57
0.59
1.28
2.15
3.25
Compliant DEF size (L)
2% dosage
19.78
4.46
11.92
16.45
22.49
39.40
66.8
3% dosage
29.68
6.69
17.89
24.68
33.74
59.09
99.2
3% dosage plus
38.58
8.69
23.25
32.08
43.86
76.82
100
Notes: Implied dosage is derived by dividing the observed DEF tank size by the fuel consumption for an annual mileage 
of 20,000 km. Compliant DEF tank sizes are computed for the three scenarios described in the text. Each observation is a 
diesel SCR vehicle approved under Euro 6 NEDC. The RDE dataset has 84 such vehicles, and our main dataset has 744.
sizes would need to increase on average from 16.3 liters to 29.7 liters in the 3% compliance sce- 
nario. At least 66.1% of vehicle models have insufficient DEF tank sizes in the conservative 2% 
scenario. Overall, Table 2 provides evidence that the automakers did not comply with the Euro 
6 emission standards under the NEDC.
We also find that the working group increased dosages and became more compliant from 
2018 onwards under the WLTP. In Appendix Table A5 Column (1), we report results from 
regressing the working group’s DEF dosage choices on the test cycle indicator with vehicle 
series fixed effects. We find that the average working-group vehicle increases its DEF dosage by 
0.21 percentage points as the test cycle changed from NEDC to WLTP (the mean dosage was 
1.6% under NEDC). In Column (2), using the RDE dataset, we find the working group substan- 
tially reduced NOx emissions. The NOx exceedance factor decreases by 1.35 from a mean of 
2.8 when the test procedure changed from NEDC to WLTP. Therefore, the working group could 
have achieved compliance but chose not to use the SCR technology to its full potential under 
NEDC between 2014 and 2018.
We conclude that there is clear evidence of noncompliance in the period 2014–2018 when 
NEDC type-approved Euro 6 vehicles were sold. The firms communicated about reducing DEF 
tank sizes, and the DEF emission control systems were upgraded in response to regulatory 
changes after the VW scandal.
4.6.
Summary
We summarize this section with four important takeaways for our empirical model. First, the fact 
that firms install costly SCR systems in response to the regulation and express concern about 
insufficiently-sized DEF tanks in internal communications shows that firms consider potential 
noncompliance penalties when making noncompliant abatement choices. In the language of our 
theoretical model, EK f (a) > 0 when a f < a∗
f . Second, the EU member states enforce the Euro 
6 emissions standards imperfectly and are at an information disadvantage about actual emissions 
and the amount of abatement needed for compliance. Firms can, therefore, enter the market 
with noncompliant vehicles. Third, the working group settled a cartel case with the European 
Commission and admitted to coordinating to restrict DEF tank sizes. In the data, we thus observe 
a coordinated equilibrium with less abatement than without coordination: aJ < aN. Fourth, our 
data confirm widespread noncompliance in the industry, aJ < a∗, and we find the working group


===== [p.18] =====
52 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
chooses smaller DEF tanks than the rest of the industry, and we observe tank sizes increase after 
the revelation of noncompliance. These facts inform the non-cooperative counterfactuals we 
construct below.
5. ESTIMATION
5.1.
Demand
The demand model is a random coefficients nested logit model (RCNL), which combines the 
nested logit as in Cardell (1997) and Berry (1994), and the random coefficients logit as in BLP 
(Berry et al., 1995). See Miller and Weinberg (2017) for a recent application and Grigolon and 
Verboven (2014) for comparing different demand models. We define a market as a country-year 
and suppress the market subscript for notational ease. Each consumer i has conditional indirect 
utility from purchasing vehicle j:
Ui j = δ j + µi j + ¯εi j,
(7)
where δ j is the mean utility of vehicle j that is the same for every consumer, µi j is the individual 
deviation from the mean utility, and ¯εi j is a stochastic term described below. The outside option 
( j = 0) is not purchasing a vehicle, with its indirect utility normalised to ui0 = ¯εi0.31
The mean utility δ j of vehicle j is:
δ j = αp j + x j(a j)β + ξ j,
(8)
where p j is the retail price, and x j is a vector of vehicle characteristics. Unobserved vehicle- 
specific attributes and demand shocks are represented by ξ j. The abatement choice a j, measured 
as the size of the DEF tank, enters the indirect utility function through its effect on vehicle 
characteristics x j, such as trunk space.32 Pollution reduction is considered an externality and 
does not enter the indirect utility independently.33 In Section 6, we empirically test whether 
consumers value DEF tanks sizes.
The individual deviation µi j from the mean utility is:
µi j = σp p jνip +
∑︂
k
σkx jk(a jk)νik,
(9)
where νip, νik are standard normal draws. We allow the DEF tank size to affect this individual- 
specific utility through trunk space. Some consumers may care more about trunk space (e.g.
families and golfers). Additionally, we allow for random coefficients on prices, power, and range.
Consumer-vehicle-specific taste shocks, ¯εi j, follow the distributional assumptions of the 
nested logit model in Cardell (1997). We define ten size classes, c = 0, 1, . . . , 9, such that class 0
31. We assume that households are in the market for a new vehicle every 7 years. The implied outside good share 
varies between 30% and 77%.
32. Appendix Table A4 reports that a 1-liter increase in the DEF tank size reduces the trunk space by 0.91 liters. 
An average DEF tank of 16 liters then takes up 3.6% of the average trunk space of a diesel vehicle. A DEF tank also 
increases curb weight by 1%, affecting, in turn, fuel consumption. We focus on trunk space because it is the most 
important margin. Ewing (2018) reports only the trade-off with trunk space.
33. Our framework can accommodate consumers partially considering pollution, as long as the private willing- 
ness to pay for pollution reduction is less than its social value. The impact of collusion on buyer surplus would be 
ambiguous because collusion (which decreases abatement) would increase buyer surplus through increased trunk space 
but decrease it through increased pollution.


===== [p.19] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
53
includes the outside good, and the other nine classes are based on the EU vehicle size classifica- 
tion: subcompact, compact, intermediate, standard, luxury, MPV, SUV, compact van, and sports. 
We have ¯εi j = ζic(ρ ) + (1 −ρ )εi j, with εi j i.i.d. extreme value, and ζic(ρ ), which depends on 
the parameter ρ, having the unique distribution such that ¯εi j is extreme value. The nesting param- 
eter ρ has a value, 0 ≤ρ ≤1. When ρ = 0, the model becomes a standard random coefficient 
logit model. When the nesting parameter is larger than 0, consumer preferences for goods in the 
same nest correlate more strongly.
Consumer i chooses vehicle j if Ui j ≥Ui j′ for all j′ ̸ = j. The market share for vehicle j
comes from integrating over individual choices:
s j =
∫︂exp{(δ j + µi j)/(1 −ρ )}
exp{Iic/(1 −ρ )}
exp{Iic}
exp{Ii} dνi,
(10)
with the inclusive value terms defined as: Ii0 = 0, Iic = (1 −ρ )log ∑︁Jc
j′=1 exp{(δ j′ + µi j′)/(1 −
ρ )}, and Ii = log(1 + ∑︁C 
c=1 exp{Iic}), where the first sum is over the products Jc within class
c and the second sum over all inside nests C. The parameters from the demand model to be 
estimated are θ = (α, β , ρ , σ ).
We allow for correlation between prices and the unobserved ξ j. Our model considers strate- 
gic choices of the DEF tank size. We are less concerned about the correlation between ξ j and 
trunk space through the DEF tank size. The DEF tank size is a design choice that is not eas- 
ily adjustable after market entry, and automakers design vehicles years ahead of market launch. 
For robustness, we allow for potential correlations of ξ j and trunk space due to the DEF tank 
size choice. Our instrumental variables below correct the potential bias in the taste parameter for 
trunk space stemming from that correlation.
We instrument for prices, trunk space, random coefficients, and the nesting parameter with 
five groups of instrumental variables. First, we include BLP instruments constructed from exoge- 
nous vehicle characteristics. The BLP instruments are the sums of each of the exogenous 
characteristics of other vehicles produced by the same automaker and those produced by other 
automakers in the same market. Second, we include a set of cost instruments related to produc- 
tion organisation. We compute the number of engine versions produced on the same production 
line and a dummy capturing changes in production lines, assuming that production line changes 
affect costs.34 Third, we instrument for trunk space using gross trunk space. In the data, we 
observe net trunk space after space is taken up by the DEF tank (when a DEF tank is present 
in the vehicle). However, the gross trunk space equals the net trunk space for vehicles without 
DEF tanks. The gross trunk space of a vehicle without a DEF tank strongly correlates with the 
trunk space of a vehicle with a DEF tank in the same series.35 Gross trunk space is a valid instru- 
ment because it is chosen in the earliest stages of vehicle design and remains fixed throughout 
the whole design process (Whitefoot et al., 2017). Fourth, we construct approximate optimal 
instruments to identify the variances of the random coefficients (Reynaert and Verboven, 2014;
Conlon and Gortmaker, 2020). Fifth, we include the number of products in each nest and market 
to instrument for the nesting parameter.
34. A typical manufacturing plant consists of several production lines. A production line consists of several 
stations where workers or machines perform various assembly steps. Our data includes the name of each production 
line. A change in production line means that the vehicle assembly process moves to another line within the same or 
another plant.
35. Series are distinguished by body styles (e.g. Audi A3 Cabriolet versus Audi A4 Limousine), and vehicles 
within a series have very similar dimensions and gross trunk space.


===== [p.20] =====
54 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
We estimate the demand model with a general method of moments estimator. We invert the 
market shares using a contraction mapping to obtain ξ (θ ) for every parameter guess. Define Z
to be the matrix of instruments and A a weighting matrix. We estimate θ by:
min
θ
ξ (θ )′Z AZ′ξ (θ ).
(11)
Our estimation algorithm takes into account the recent improvements in demand estimation.36
5.2.
Supply
In the supply model, firms joining the working group make coordinated decisions in response to 
the EU emissions standard. The timing is as follows. First, the firms observe the emission stan- 
dard and the penalty function for noncompliance. Second, selected firms receive an invitation to 
join the working group. If all invited firms accept, then they form the working group. Third, all 
firms make simultaneous abatement choices (DEF dosages) for vehicles with an SCR system. 
The working group coordinates their abatement choices, and non-working group firms make 
non-coordinated choices. This ends the vehicle design phase for the EU6 production period 
2014–2018. Fourth, vehicle-by-market-specific demand and cost shocks materialize. Fifth, all 
firms make simultaneous price decisions for all vehicles (gasoline and diesel) in a Nash Bertrand 
game and collect variable profits. Sixth, the regulator might discover noncompliance; noncom- 
pliant firms pay penalties when caught. The difficulty of the empirical setting is that we do 
not observe the penalty function associated with noncompliance and that our application only 
contains a single noncompliance event. Yet, we present an approach to estimate reductions in 
the penalty function obtained by the working group and the market equilibrium effects of the 
collusive agreement.
Firms’ payoffs at the end of the game are the sum of variable profits and expected penalties. 
Many of our results focus on the participation decision to join the working group, a decision 
made before the demand and cost shocks materialize. Therefore, we use the terms expected 
penalty EK f and expected profit Eπ f to quantify the firms’ expectations about penalties and 
variable profits at the time of the participation decision. We draw from the estimated cost and 
demand shock distributions to obtain the expected profit Eπ.
5.2.1. Variable profits. Firms earn variable profits given by:
π f (a, p) =
∑︂
j∈J f
[︁
p j −mc j(a j)
]︁
q j(a, p),
(12)
where J f is the set of products of firm f, mc j is the marginal cost of vehicle j, and q j is sales quan- 
tity. Abatement actions a j may impact variable profits in two ways. First, larger DEF tanks may 
reduce the willingness to pay for the vehicle because it compromises trunk space, an attribute 
that buyers potentially value. Second, abatement actions may increase the marginal cost of pro- 
duction. Larger DEF tanks may be costlier to install. Our demand and marginal cost estimates
36. We use the Knitro solver with an analytic gradient, approximate the market share integral with 1,000 Modified 
Latin Hypercube Sampling (MLHS) draws, use a tight convergence criterion for the contraction mapping (1e−12), 
estimate variances of the random coefficients and not standard deviations, use approximate optimal instruments for the 
random coefficients, start from 10 different starting values to avoid local minima, estimate two-step GMM with optimal 
weighting matrix, and check first and second-order conditions at the obtained minimum. See Conlon and Gortmaker 
(2020) for an overview of methodological improvements in demand estimation.


===== [p.21] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
55
indicate how much variable profits decrease with DEF tank size. Likewise, cross-price and cross- 
trunk-space derivatives of the estimated demand model determine the degree to which a firm’s 
variable profit depends on competitors’ abatement actions.
5.2.2. Marginal costs. Assuming Nash Bertrand competition in prices, we back out 
marginal costs from the first-order conditions of the variable profit function. Let Ω be the owner- 
ship matrix, where the element Ω jh indicates whether the same firm sells product j and product
h. Let S(a, p) be a matrix whose element Sjh = −∂sh(a, p)
∂p j
. Then, the first-order condition of the 
firms’ maximisation problem implies the following vector of marginal costs:
mc = p + (Ω ⊙S(a, p))−1s,
(13)
where s is the vector of products’ market shares, and ⊙is the element-by-element matrix 
multiplication operator.
We regress these marginal costs on product attributes and an indicator for members of the 
working group to estimate the implications of abatement choices and collusion on marginal 
costs:
mc j = ηxx j + ηaa j + ηwga jWG j + ω j,
(14)
where WG j is a dummy variable, taking the value of one whenever the producer of vehicle j is 
in the working group and zero otherwise, and ω j is the unobserved marginal cost. If the working 
group achieved cost savings relative to other firms, we expect the parameter ηwg to be negative. 
We estimate marginal costs with a rich set of fixed effects. The cost parameters are identified 
from variations between almost identical vehicles in the same series generation produced on the 
same platform and plant. Because of the rich set of fixed effects and our timing assumptions, we 
assume that there is no concern for any remaining endogeneity of DEF tank sizes.
5.2.3. Bounds on expected noncompliance penalties. We estimate a bound on the reduc- 
tion in expected penalties formulated in Proposition 1 by simulating automakers’ expected 
variable profits at different abatement action profiles. We estimate this bound in three steps.
First, we derive a lower bound on the expected noncompliance penalty faced by each 
working-group firm if it were to unilaterally choose the same level of low abatement as in the 
working-group proposal. We do so by rearranging Inequality (2):
EK f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) ≥Eπ f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −Eπ f (aN) + EK f (aN),
(15)
which indicates that the expected noncompliance penalty of this unilateral low abatement choice 
must more than offset the associated variable profit gain, plus any applicable penalty at the non- 
cooperative profile. A conservative lower bound on the expected noncompliance penalty of this 
unilateral low abatement is Eπ f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −Eπ f (aN), because EK f (aN) ≥0.
Second, we obtain an upper bound on the expected penalties faced by each working-group 
firm from the participation constraint in Inequality (1):
EK f (a J) + EA f (a J) ≤Eπ f (a J) −Eπ f (aN) + EK f (aN).
(16)
The expected noncompliance penalty for a working-group firm f under the collusive proposal 
must be smaller than the variable profit gain from collusion, plus any applicable penalties at the 
non-cooperative profile.


===== [p.22] =====
56 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
Third, we combine the lower and upper bounds from above to obtain a rearranged version of 
Inequality (4) from Proposition 1:
EK f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −EK f (a J) −EA f (a J)
⏞
⏟⏟
⏞
Reduction in Expected Penalties
≥Eπ f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −Eπ f (a J)
⏞
⏟⏟
⏞
Reduction in Variable Profit
,
(17)
which provides a lower bound on the reduction in the expected penalties from joint low abate- 
ment relative to unilateral low abatement. The inequality also gives a conservative lower bound 
for the reduction in expected noncompliance penalties, EK f (a J 
f , aN
−f ) −EK f (a J), because
EA f (a J) ≥0. Although this lower bound is a direct derivation from the lower bound in Inequal- 
ity (15) and the upper bound in Inequality (16), it has the advantage of not relying on EK f (aN); 
we only need information on variable profits at different abatement profiles.
5.2.4. Non-cooperative equilibria. To quantify the bounds on expected noncompliance 
penalties characterised by Inequalities (15)–(17), we need to estimate variable profits Eπ f (a J),
Eπ f (a J 
f , aN
−f ), and Eπ f (aN). We estimate the first term from observed quantities and Nash- 
Bertrand markups defined in equation (13).37 To estimate the remaining terms, we need to know 
DEF tank size choices in a non-cooperative equilibrium, aN, which is not observed in the data.
The relative position of aN between a J and a∗determines the degree of additional noncom- 
pliance achieved by the working group. We present results for two cases of the non-cooperative 
equilibrium. First, a structural estimation of the marginal expected noncompliance penalty func- 
tion, which shows that the industry would move to a compliant equilibrium aN = a∗without 
collusion. Second, we simulate a noncompliant aN ∈(a J, a∗) that plausibly captures the min- 
imal effect of collusion without relying on assumptions about the expected noncompliance 
penalty function.
In the first case, we estimate aN from the optimal abatement choices of non-working-group 
firms. We assume firms make abatement choices at the series generation level r.38 This modelling 
choice is based on the observation that there is no variation in the DEF tank size within a series 
generation. The first-order condition associated with the non-cooperative abatement choices of 
non-working group firms balances the marginal profit of changing abatement for all DEF vehi- 
cles in series r with the marginal change in the expected profit. Thus, the first-order condition 
for series r by a non-working-group firm g, conditional on the working-group collusion, is:
∂Eπg(a J)
∂ar
= ∂EKg(a J)
∂ar
.
(18)
The estimated model of demand and supply allows us to construct the left-hand side of this 
equation. Following the analytical method of Villas-Boas (2007), we compute the marginal 
changes in expected profits by summing up the marginal changes due to increased marginal 
production cost, decreased demand from smaller trunk space, and an adjustment of equilib- 
rium prices (see Appendix Section A4.1). We use variations in the marginal expected profits 
to estimate the marginal expected noncompliance penalty of the non-working group firms by
37. Firms make decisions before demand and cost shocks materialize. In simulations, we take 100 draws with 
replacement from the estimated demand and cost shock distributions, ξ and ω, respectively.
38. A series generation is a firm-designated collection of models of the same style and dimensions within 3–5 
years. For example, the series generation “BMW Series 3 Limousine (07/15–10/18)” contains models 316, 318, 320, 
325, 330, 335, 340 and runs from 2015 to 2018.


===== [p.23] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
57
specifying the right-hand side of (18) as follows:
∂EKg(a)
∂ar
= −exp{γ0 + γ1ar + γ2a−g + γ3 log(sizeg) + ϵr},
(19)
where the marginal expected noncompliance penalty is an exponential function of a firm’s own 
abatement choice, the average abatement levels of other firms, and its historical sales revenue. 
We assume an i.i.d. error term ϵr. We present estimation results in Appendix Section A4.3.
With the estimation results of (19), we expand the set of equation (18) to include the first- 
order conditions that working group firms would use to choose DEF dosage non-cooperatively. 
The system has aN as unknowns, equal to the total number of series generations with SCR. 
We recompute the equilibrium prices while solving for the counterfactual aN. We detail the 
computation in Appendix A4.3. We find that all firms have the incentive to increase abatement 
in the absence of collusion: the decrease in variable profits is smaller than the decrease in the 
expected penalty. Since the expected noncompliance penalty is zero at compliance, our estimates 
imply that the non-cooperative equilibrium is the corner solution with industry-wide compliance,
aN = a∗.
A compliant non-cooperative equilibrium corresponds to the maximal amount of additional 
noncompliance achieved by the working group proposal. It not only allows the working group to 
choose lower dosages than the rest of the industry, but it also leads to widespread noncompliance 
in the industry.39 We construct this aN by increasing the DEF tank sizes of all firms in the indus- 
try to compliance. We show results for the 3% dosage scenario defined in Section 3 and report 
robustness results for the 2% dosage and 3% dosage plus (with real-world fuel consumption) in 
Appendix Table A9. These scenarios span a comprehensive range of what it takes to comply, 
with average DEF tank sizes ranging from 19 to 38 liters and average increases of 3 to 22 liters.
In the second case, we focus on a scenario where the working group achieves a mini- 
mal amount of additional noncompliance beyond non-cooperative choices: aN ∈(a J, a∗). To 
approximate this aN, we rely on the difference in the observed dosages between the working 
and non-working group firms, as shown in Figure 3. Collusion may have merely enabled the 
working-group firms to adopt lower dosages than the non-working-group firms. In this case, 
absent collusion, the working group may have chosen dosages comparable to the rest of the 
industry. We implement this approach by moving the distribution of dosages of the working 
group so that their median dosage in each year equals that of the median of non-working- 
group firms. Across years, this corresponds to an increase in the working group median dosages 
from 1.5% to 2.1%, or a 5-liter increase in median tank sizes. We ignore a potential strate- 
gic response of non-working-group firms to the change in the DEF tank sizes of the working 
group. Such strategic responses are of second-order importance for the welfare results because 
the non-working-group firms sell much fewer vehicles with DEF tanks.
To sum up, collusion succeeded in reducing tank sizes, and we compute two non-cooperative 
scenarios corresponding to a minimal and a maximal collusion-enabled reduction. We use these 
scenarios to quantify the possible outcomes of interest in the next two sections.
39. Figure 3 shows that working-group firms released vehicles approved for Euro 6 before the regulation became 
binding in 2014. The early DEF dosages are comparable to what firms chose in 2014–2018. The working group may 
have thus signalled their low DEF dosage choices to non-working group firms. When Euro 6 standards take effect, the 
non-working groups follow the working group into noncompliance.


===== [p.24] =====
58 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
6. ESTIMATION RESULTS
We first present our demand and marginal cost estimates. We then quantify the bounds of the 
reduction in expected noncompliance penalties achieved by collusion. We show empirical evi- 
dence for the possible reasons behind such a reduction, discussed in Section 2. We conclude by 
describing how the collusive scheme affects the compliance choices of firms outside the working 
group.
6.1.
Demand estimates
We report the demand estimates in Table 3. Column (1) presents a logit OLS. In column (2), we 
expand the model to the nested logit, and we instrument for prices, trunk space, and the nesting 
term. The instrumental variables for price correct the upward bias in the price coefficient in Col- 
umn (1). The trunk IV based on gross trunk does not change the trunk space coefficient relative 
to the OLS, providing evidence that DEF tanks are likely uncorrelated with the unobserved vehi- 
cle quality. The magnitude of the trunk space coefficient implies that the willingness to pay for a 
14-liter increase in the trunk space, or equivalently having an average-sized DEF tank removed, 
is e 291.40 The nesting parameter is 0.33, meaning there is more substitution between vehicles 
in the same size class than between vehicles in different size classes.
The nested random coefficient logit specification in Column (3) shows significant hetero- 
geneity in the price and range coefficients but not in the trunk space or power coefficient.41 We 
use the RCNL model from Column (3) in all the subsequent estimates. The nesting coefficient 
is precisely estimated to be 0.47, and together with the random coefficients, the demand model 
estimates higher cross-price elasticities for more similar vehicles in terms of prices, power, and 
size class relative to the logit model. The outside good is in a separate nest, so there is also more 
substitution between inside goods than between the outside good and inside goods.
The median own-price elasticity is −3.06. The median firm-level price elasticity is −2.44. 
The median market-level price elasticity is −0.74. The median margin is 37%. These price 
elasticities are of the same magnitude as recent other applications in the Spanish (Miravete et al., 
2018) and German (Remmy, 2022) automobile markets, but somewhat lower than estimates 
in the US market (Grieco et al., 2023). Appendix Table A7 reports the price diversion ratios. 
The results show that due to the random coefficients, the products of the collusive firms are 
closer substitutes, and more so for vehicles with DEF tanks. These substitution patterns play an 
important role in our analysis of the diffusion of responsibility and skin in the game mechanisms 
below and in our counterfactual analysis.
Column (4) also tests consumer demand for DEF by including an indicator variable of 
whether the vehicle has an SCR system with a DEF tank and, if so, the DEF tank size. We 
find no statistically significant demand for DEF. In Appendix Table A6, we report more speci- 
fications involving the DEF tank size and similarly find no statistically significant coefficients. 
While those imprecise estimates do not statistically rule out a positive demand for DEF, several 
arguments indicate that consumer demand for DEF is unlikely. First, if consumers value SCR 
emissions control technology, automakers could have offered SCR much earlier. Engine variants
40. To obtain this number, we compute: 0.87/1,000 × 14/1.47 × 35,091 = 283 using the average GDP per 
capita of e 35,091.
41. We estimate a normal distribution for the random coefficient on price. In theory, this could be inconsistent 
because firms would set infinite prices if some consumers have a positive price coefficient. In practice, we use a truncated 
normal distribution so that no simulated individuals ever have a positive taste for the price. We truncate the 1% most 
extreme positive and negative MLHS draws for the price random coefficient.


===== [p.25] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
59
TABLE 3
Demand estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Logit OLS
Nested Logit IV
RC Nested Logit
RC Nested Logit
Param.
St. Err.
Param.
St. Err.
Param.
St. Err.
Param.
St. Err.
Mean Valuation
Mean Valuation
Retail Price / Per Capita GDP
−0.21
(0.02)
−1.47
(0.08)
−2.04
(0.31)
−2.04
(0.31)
Trunk Space (cubic m)
0.90
(0.13)
0.87
(0.09)
0.83
(0.13)
0.83
(0.13)
Power (100 kw)
−0.54
(0.02)
0.25
(0.03)
0.13
(0.09)
0.13
(0.09)
Engine Size (L)
0.08
(0.02)
0.15
(0.01)
0.13
(0.02)
0.12
(0.01)
Curb Weight (ton)
−1.70
(0.07)
−1.10
(0.05)
−0.81
(0.01)
−0.81
(0.06)
Footprint (sq m)
1.77
(0.03)
1.28
(0.04)
1.04
(0.04)
1.05
(0.04)
Fuel Cost / Per Capita GDP
−64.73
(1.14) −36.54
(1.12)
−52.80
(1.23)
−52.92
(1.23)
Foreign
−0.90
(0.01)
−0.56
(0.01)
−0.54
(0.01)
−0.54
(0.01)
Range (1,000 km)
0.82
(0.04)
0.60
(0.04)
0.07
(0.04)
0.07
(0.04)
Having SCR
−0.01
(0.04)
DEF Tank Size (cubic m)
3.67
(2.30)
Standard Deviation
Standard Deviation
Retail Price / Per Capita GDP
0.78
(0.20)
0.78
(0.20)
Trunk Space
0.04
(0.19)
0.04
(0.19)
Power
0.18
(0.04)
0.19
(0.04)
Range
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
Nesting Parameter
0.33
(0.01)
0.47
(0.01)
0.46
(0.01)
IV for Price
X
X
X
IV for Trunk
X
X
X
N
212,661
212,661
212,661
212,661
Notes: All specifications include country-year trend, country-fuel type FE, drive type FE, transmission FE, series-body 
FE, Euro emission standards FE, and market duration FE. The random coefficient nested logit is estimated by optimal 
two-step GMM.
and interior choices are omnipresent in this market. In contrast, SCR was deployed as a response 
to Euro 6, as shown in Figure 1. Second, consumers are likely uninformed about the DEF tank 
size. DEF tank sizes are not usually listed in owner’s manuals or displayed at dealerships. Third, 
as described in Section 4, DEF refills are designed to coincide with annual check-ups without 
consumer intervention during the study period.
6.2.
Marginal cost estimates
Table 4 reports the marginal cost estimates for diesel vehicles. We allow the marginal cost func- 
tion to be specific for diesel and gasoline.42 Column (1) estimates that the SCR technology costs
e 687 and the LNT technology costs e 437. The estimates are statistically consistent with the 
engineering estimates in Sanchez et al. (2012), who report SCR to cost $494 (for large vehicles) 
and LNT $320 (for small vehicles). To estimate how the marginal cost increases with every liter 
of the DEF tank size, Column (2) shows that DEF tanks are on average e 42 per liter. We use 
this estimate in our counterfactual analysis when we change DEF tank sizes.
42. We do not report the results for gasoline vehicles because they never have a DEF tank and their marginal 
costs remain constant in the counterfactual simulations.


===== [p.26] =====
60 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
TABLE 4
Marginal cost estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
LNT
437.18
405.08
450.89
430.01
(84.57)
(81.12)
(132.15)
(130.83)
SCR
686.88
941.76
(115.72)
(200.14)
DEF Size (L)
42.09
62.28
(6.61)
(13.87)
LNT × Working Group
−18.17
−23.51
(168.88)
(165.08)
SCR × Working Group
−378.65
(247.60)
DEF Size × Working Group
−26.98
(15.94)
Controls
X
X
X
X
Fixed Effects
X
X
X
X
N
97,228
97,228
97,228
97,228
Adjusted R2
0.631
0.631
0.631
0.631
Notes: Reported in 2018 euros. Diesel vehicles only. Fixed effects are at the series generation level. Control variables 
include engine size, horsepower, torque, wheelbase, footprint, height, fuel consumption, curb weight, country-specific 
year trend, and dummies of registration country, transmission, drive type, body type, numbers of doors, number of 
gears, number of valves, fuel injection, engine platform, and producing plant. Standard errors are clustered at the series 
generation level.
Columns (3)–(4) add interaction terms with the working group indicator to the previous 
two specifications. All the interaction terms have statistically imprecise parameters. We do not 
find statistical evidence that the working group achieved cost savings relative to the rest of the 
industry. The European Commission’s documents and the working group’s responses did not 
mention cost efficiencies, nor were upstream DEF suppliers involved in the case.
6.3.
Estimates of expected noncompliance penalties
To estimate the bounds on the expected noncompliance penalties, we simulate the expected 
variable profits at DEF tank size choices according to Inequalities (15)–(17). We consider the 
observed DEF tank sizes as the collusive choices a J 
f . For the non-cooperative tank size choices
aN 
f , we use the two scenarios discussed in Section 5: one where the non-cooperative equilibrium 
is noncompliant and the other where it is compliant. We recompute marginal costs and trunk 
space with counterfactual DEF tank sizes for each scenario and find new equilibrium prices and 
quantities.
Table 5 quantifies the bound from Inequality (17). For the noncompliant counterfactual sce- 
nario, the bounds for (15) and (16) cannot be computed because the expected penalty EK f (aN)
is not zero when aN < a∗. However, the term EK f (aN) cancels out when taking the difference 
between the first two bounds, so that the reduction in the expected penalty can be computed 
without having to take a stance on the level of expected penalties in the non-cooperative profile. 
Compared to unilateral low abatement, coordinated low abatement reduces the expected penal- 
ties by at least e 30–109 million for BMW, e 18–83 million for Daimler, and e 21–153 million 
for Volkswagen. The estimated penalty reductions differ between firms because the size of the 
change in the counterfactual trunks is asymmetric and because each firm sells different prod- 
ucts associated with different own- and cross-price elasticities. In sum, collusion reduces the


===== [p.27] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
61
TABLE 5
Bounds on the reduction in expected noncompliance penalties
Non-Cooperative Scenario
Noncompliant
Compliant
BMW
30
109
Daimler
18
83
Volkswagen
21
153
Working Group Total
69
345
Notes: Reported in million 2018 euros. This table quantifies Inequality (17) under two non-cooperative scenarios.
expected noncompliance penalties the working group faces by at least e 69–345 million across 
the two scenarios. Appendix Table A9 reports results under additional compliance scenarios.
The reductions in expected penalties are economically significant. In the compliant non- 
cooperative scenario, the working group increases variable profits by e 410 million relative to 
compliance (see Table 8). The e 345 million reduction in expected penalties is large relative to 
the additional realised variable profit gain from collusion.
6.4.
Reasons for expected penalty reduction
We provide quantitative evidence for the three reasons that potentially reduce expected penalties: 
diffusion of responsibility, skin in the game, and probability of detection. The evidence presented 
here, illustrated with compliance as the non-cooperative scenario, suggests the extent to which 
these economic forces are potentially present in the industry. With a single collusion case, we 
cannot identify their importance separately.
6.4.1. Diffusion of responsibility. We quantify the degree to which a single firm’s noncom- 
pliance penalty could decrease when caught along with other violators compared to being caught 
alone. To do so, we compute a hypothetical example where firms receive reputation damages 
alone or jointly. We proceed in two steps. First, we apply joint reputation shocks that reduce the 
profits of the working group firms. We reduce buyers’ indirect utilities with firm-specific addi- 
tive shocks t f until each firm’s profits decrease by one-third of the working group gains. Second, 
we apply the same reputation shock to one firm at a time without shocking the reputation of the 
other working group firms (firm f receives t f and t−f = 0 for other firms −f ).43
When a firm’s profit from a joint shock is smaller than that from a shock received alone, 
we interpret this as evidence of the presence of diffusion in this industry. When only one firm 
is caught and receives a reputation shock, other firms’ reputations are unaffected, so consumers 
can substitute for the undamaged firms or the outside good. When multiple firms are caught 
noncompliant, all firms’ reputations are affected. The joint reputation shock shifts the industry’s 
position relative to the outside option but not the relative position between firms. Joint reputation 
shocks thus potentially diffuse the damage that unilateral reputation shocks inflict on single 
firms.44
43. Bachmann et al. (2022) study the collective reputation of the German automakers; we shock reputations of 
individual automakers.
44. A further argument for the diffusion of responsibility could come from the political economy of national 
economic concerns. According to an EU parliamentary report (Gieseke and Gerbandy, 2017), member states were aware 
of noncompliance but were reluctant to intervene. A group of firms or an entire industry might be too big to prosecute.


===== [p.28] =====
62 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
TABLE 6
Diffusion of responsibility with reputation shocks
Joint
Unilateral
Shock Effect
Shock Effect
Effect Difference
% Diffused
π f (t f , t−f ) −π f
π f (t f , 0) −π f
π f (t f , t−f ) −π f (t f , 0)
BMW
−137
−186
49
26%
Daimler
−137
−175
38
22%
Volkswagen
−137
−242
105
43%
Notes: Reputation shock t f is the reduction in the indirect consumer utility for each firm f in the working group that 
reduces the working group’s variable profit (in million 2018 euros) to that under the 3% dosage compliance. The last 
column computes the percentage of reputation damages that are diffused by the joint shocks relative to the unilateral 
shocks (e.g. 100 × 49/186 = 26%).
TABLE 7
Skin in the game with business stealing
Variable Profit Change
% Variable Profit Change Stolen
BMW
Daimler
Volkswagen
from the Rest of the Working Group
BMW
100
−12
−28
39%
Daimler
−31
177
−53
47%
Volkswagen
−65
−59
498
25%
Notes: This table reports the change in variable profits (in million 2018 euros) when a firm in a row is the unilateral 
violator of the regulation: the firm chooses tank sizes a J 
f while competitors choose a∗
−f from the 3% compliance 
scenario. The final column computes the percentage of the increase in profits from violation that is stolen from other 
firms in the working group (e.g. (31 + 53)/177 = 47%).
Table 6 shows the extent to which reputation damage to a single working-group firm dif- 
fuses with joint reputation shocks. The reputation damage would be 26% smaller for BMW, 
22% for Daimler, and 43% for Volkswagen when other firms also receive reputation shocks. To 
explain the strong diffusion effect for Volkswagen, note that the degree of diffusion in this exer- 
cise depends on the estimated substitution patterns and number of affected vehicles. Since each 
working-group firm loses less when other firms’ reputations are also damaged, we interpret this 
as evidence that noncompliance penalties could diffuse in this sector.
6.4.2. Skin in the game. We compute the extent to which a unilateral violator would reduce 
the variable profits of its compliant competitors. The degree to which unilateral noncompliance 
leads to business stealing depends on the substitution patterns in the industry. Suppose that the 
competitors can legally recoup the variable profit damages inflicted by the violator. The violating 
firm may then want to reduce such risks by including its competitors in a collusive scheme.
Table 7 shows that whenever a working-group firm violates unilaterally, between 25% to 
47% of the variable profit gains from unilateral violation stem from stealing business from other 
firms in the working group. Collusion reduces the risk of being reported by a competitor to the 
regulator. When every working group member violates the regulation, every member has skin in 
the game and is less likely to expose the noncompliance.
6.4.3. Probability of detection. We show that DEF tank sizes of each working-group firm 
would have stood out had the firm been the sole violator. Coordinated noncompliance can reduce 
the probability of each working-group firm being detected noncompliant by the regulator.


===== [p.29] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
63
While Figure 2 shows the DEF tank size distribution observed under the collusive scheme, 
Figure 4 plots the observed DEF tank sizes of each working-group firm against the 3% compliant 
distribution for the rest of the industry. It suggests that vehicles released by BMW, Daimler, 
and Volkswagen would likely appear suspicious relative to a compliant rest-of-industry.45 The 
working group thus potentially benefits from reduced scrutiny by moving into noncompliance 
jointly.46
In sum, we find empirical support for an economic environment that is susceptible to reduc- 
tions in expected penalties under coordinated noncompliance. Our demand estimates show that 
the working-group firms are close competitors, especially in the large diesel segment; this leads 
to strong diffusion of responsibility and skin in the game. Furthermore, by adopting similarly 
small DEF tanks, the working group masks their otherwise suspiciously low abatement. Finally, 
the working group involves all major German automakers, creating a situation where the national 
enforcer might find the working group too big to fail, an explanation that can be nested under 
diffusion of responsibility and reduction in the detection probability.
6.5.
Estimated incentives of the non-working-Group firms
Our empirical analysis of the non-working-group firms’ variable profits shows that non- 
working-group firms prefer the non-cooperative equilibrium. Relative to the noncompliant
non-cooperative scenario, collusion causes the non-working-group firms to lose e 109 million 
in variable profits because they compete with more attractive diesel vehicles of the working 
group. However, moving from the compliant non-cooperative scenario to the observed collusion 
only reduces the non-working-group firms’ variable profits by e 66 million. Relative to the com- 
pliant non-cooperative scenario, collusion enables noncompliance for the entire industry. The 
non-working group’s loss from competing with more attractive diesel vehicles of the working 
group is almost completely offset by gains from also being able to move into noncompliance.
Conditional on the working group colluding, the non-working-group firms collectively gain
e 327 million in variable profits by following the working group into noncompliance from 3% 
dosage compliance.47 We obtain this number from Inequality (5), which compares each non- 
working-group firm’s observed variable profits with what it would earn as the only compliant 
firm. This variable profit gain is also an estimate of the upper bound on the noncompliance 
penalties that the non-working-group firms expect. The reasons that explain the reduction in 
expected noncompliance penalties may also apply to non-working-group firms.
45. Dohmen and Hawranek (2017) write that “[i]f one manufacturer had installed larger [DEF] tanks, licensing 
and regulatory authorities would probably have become suspicious. The obvious question would have been why that 
one company’s vehicles needed so much more urea to clean the exhaust gases, while the other manufacturers’ cars 
supposedly managed with significantly less [DEF].”
46. One could make an opposite case: given that all firms are noncompliant, any single investigation would be 
more likely to expose all the firms. The probability of detection may then increase. It is interesting to consider the 
Volkswagen scandal. The scandal was exposed in the US by independent investigators who wanted to understand how 
Volkswagen succeeded in bringing clean diesel vehicles to the market while US automakers did not. This event matches 
the argument about a noncompliant firm standing out relative to other presumably compliant firms. In the EU, almost all 
automakers released noncompliant diesel vehicles. The regulator never investigated even while third parties, such as the 
ICCT, questioned compliance before the Volkswagen scandal.
47. We obtain this number using the realised demand and cost shocks instead of taking expectations (as we do 
for the working group firm’s bounds) due to computation burden.


===== [p.30] =====
64 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
FIGURE 4 
Unilateral noncompliance stands out
Notes: This figure plots the distribution of DEF tank sizes (in SCR-only vehicles approved for Euro 6 NEDC) of each working-group firm’s vehicles against a counterfactual distribution of compliant DEF tank 
sizes (at 3% dosage) for the rest of the industry.


===== [p.31] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
65
TABLE 8
Welfare effects of collusion, 2007–18
Non-Cooperative Scenario
Noncompliant
Compliant
Working Group’s Profit Δπ
0.20
0.41
[0.14, 0.29]
[0.29, 0.60]
Residual Claim ℜ
−1.77
−5.98
[−2.03, −1.29]
[−7.00 −4.26]
NOx health impact
−2.18
−7.89
[−2.40, −1.52]
[−8.78, −5.45]
Buyer surplus
0.52
1.97
[0.25, 0.76]
[0.88, 2.87]
Other firms’ profit
−0.11
−0.07
[−0.16, −0.07]
[−0.10, −0.05]
Net Welfare Δπ + ℜ
−1.57
−5.57
[−1.85, −1.05]
[−6.63, −3.80]
Ratio λ = Δπ /(−ℜ)
0.11
0.07
[0.09, 0.20]
[0.05, 0.13]
Notes: Reported in billion 2018 euros. The 95% confidence intervals are in brackets. See Appendix A5 for details on the 
computation of those confidence intervals.
7. WELFARE AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS
This section explains how we compute welfare in counterfactual simulations, discusses the wel- 
fare effects of collusion, and offers policy implications by comparing the existing regulatory 
environment with a collusion-proof mechanism.
7.1.
Welfare computation
We define social welfare associated with an abatement action profile a as:
W(a) = BS(a) +
∑︂
f
π f (a) −
∑︂
j
φe j(a j)q j(a),
(20)
which includes buyer surplus BS, the sum of firm profits π f , and the externality damages given 
by the marginal damage of a unit of NOx emissions, φ, times emissions and sales. Regulatory 
penalties are considered a transfer and cancel out. The social welfare change caused by collusion 
relative to competition equals:
ΔW = W(a J) −W(aN).
(21)
To find changes in buyer surplus BS and variable profits π f , we use the estimated demand and 
marginal cost parameters from Section 5. For each diesel vehicle approved under Euro 6 NEDC 
with a DEF tank, we compute corresponding changes in marginal production costs and trunk 
space from enlarging the DEF tank to be compliant.48 Given these new marginal production costs 
and trunk spaces, we solve for a new Bertrand Nash price equilibrium. We compute quantities, 
firm profits, and buyer surplus represented by the inclusive value of the choice sets.
48. We do not include a scenario where automakers change the DEF refill frequency because it is not feasible to 
estimate the costs of refills for consumers in our empirical context. If increasing the refill frequency is less costly than 
increasing the tank size, we will overestimate the collusive benefits to firms and car buyers.


===== [p.32] =====
66 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
For changes in externality damages, we sum the changes in NOx damages from each of firm
f’s Euro 6 NEDC SCR vehicle j registered in year t as follows:
T
∑︂
τ=0
δτ [︁
q j(e∗+ (a∗
j −a j)Removal Rate) −q∗
j e∗]︁
× AnnualMileage × φ ,
(22)
where T is the lifetime of a vehicle, δ is the discount factor, e∗is the compliant emission, a j
is the DEF tank size, and q∗
j and a∗
j are the counterfactual sales quantity and compliant DEF 
tank sizes.49 RemovalRate is the reduction in NOx emissions per unit of DEF tank size per 
distance driven, AnnualMileage is the annual mileage. The term (e∗+ (a∗
j −a j)Removal Rate)
represents the on-road emissions of vehicle j. To parameterize these NOx damages, we use δ =
0.943 (which corresponds to a yearly discount rate of 6%), T = 14, e∗= 80 mg/km which is 
the Euro 6 emission limit, and AnnualMileage = 20,000 km. We take the marginal damage 
estimate from Oldenkamp et al. (2016) at $78 per kg of NOx (in 2013 dollars), calculated from 
a disability-adjusted cost of 20 life years per kton from the PM2.5 pathway induced by NOx
across the EU and a value of a statistical life (VSL) of $7.6 million.50 We emphasize that these 
are only the health damages from NOx-induced PM 2.5. They do not include damages from 
NOx-induced ozone, agricultural productivity loss, compromised visibility and recreation, and 
reduced absorption of carbon dioxide by affected biomass. We use a removal rate of 7.71 as 
estimated in Section 3.
7.2.
Welfare results
Table 8 reports the welfare effects of collusion. The table shows that the working group’s extra 
variable profits due to collusion are 200 million relative to the noncompliant non-cooperative 
scenario and 410 million relative to the compliant scenario. The aggregate profits of other firms 
decrease by a smaller extent. Buyer surplus increases substantially with as much as e 1.97 billion 
relative to compliance, which amounts to e 332 per DEF vehicle sold. We find the health dam- 
ages of excess NOx to reach e 2.18–7.89 billion, outweighing the sum of the gains in firm profits 
and buyer surplus.51
Collusion enables both the working-group and non-working-group firms to increase prices 
and sales of Euro 6 NEDC DEF vehicles. Compared to the compliant non-cooperative scenario, 
Appendix Table A8 reports that the working group sells 1.4% more Euro 6 NEDC DEF vehicles 
featuring 3.6% larger trunk space and 1.4% higher prices (trunk space and price changes are 
weighted by sales quantity). Likewise, other firms sell SCR vehicles with 2.5% larger trunk 
space and 1.17% higher prices. The prices and quantities of non-NEDC-DEF diesel and gasoline 
vehicles experience only slight decreases.
49. We assume the outside good and vehicles without DEF cause no NOx emissions. We ignore outside good 
emissions because we find collusion increases the total quantity of vehicles sold by only 0.02%. See Appendix Table 
A8. Diesel vehicles without DEF have a very small market share, and gasoline vehicles emit low levels of NOx. See
Jacobsen et al. (2023) for an example of how scrappage affects US pollution standards’ efficiency.
50. This number is comparable to the current VSL recommended by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
at 7.4 million in 2006 dollars. The VSL would need to be as low as 5 million to undo the net welfare damage we find 
below across the three scenarios. All monetary values in the results are reported in 2018 euros; dollars are inflated from 
2013 to 2018 using the CPI (from 232.957 to 251.107) and converted to Euro using the 2018 exchange rate of e 1 to 
$1.18.
51. The excess NOx emissions due to collusion are 111 kton relative to compliance.


===== [p.33] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
67
Taking together buyer surplus, firm profits, and NOx damages, we find that the net welfare 
change as defined in equation (21) is −e 5.57 billion relative to the compliant non-cooperative 
scenario with a 95% confidence interval of [−6.63, −3.80]. Relative to all the non-cooperative 
scenarios in Table 8 and Appendix Table A10, we estimate welfare changes between −e 1.57 
and −e 9.57 billion.
The welfare consequence of this collusion case is very different from that of price collusion. 
While price collusion typically results in a transfer from consumers to producers, this collusion 
on noncompliance benefits both participating firms and buyers at the expense of population-wide 
externality damages.
7.3.
Policy implications
Although our welfare results show the collusion decreased welfare, simply banning all coop- 
eration is not an optimal policy. The optimal policy would aim to prevent welfare-reducing 
collusion. Cooperation on abatement decisions could enhance welfare if there is over-regulation 
(e.g. a too stringent standard) or when coordination reduces the cost of technology development. 
Our model does not include technology cost reductions from coordination, which is consistent 
with the case document and our empirical findings. However, in other contexts, cost reductions 
could be the reason for firms’ coordinated responses to regulation.
Following Che and Kim (2006), we compute the penalty that prevents welfare-reducing col- 
lusion by making the cartel the residual claimant of the welfare effect of collusion on the rest of 
the society:
ℜ = ΔW −Δπ ,
(23)
where Δπ is the working group’s profit gain from collusion, ∑︁
f ∈WG[π f (a J) −π f (aN)]. A 
residual claim penalty transforms the sum of the participation constraints (1) into Δπ + ℜ =
ΔW ≥0,52 so that the working group’s objective becomes perfectly aligned with that of a 
welfare-maximising regulator. Firms accept the collusive proposal aJ only when collusion is 
not welfare-reducing.
We construct a benchmark to evaluate the actual policy environment firms used to make their 
participation decision:
λ = Δπ
−ℜ.
(24)
Under a collusion-proof policy, we should only observe collusion if ΔW ≥0, or λ ≥1 when 
we focus on cases where ℜ< 0. In this case, collusion increases the working group’s profits 
more than it harms the rest of the society. Making the working group the residual claimant has 
a redistributive role, but the working group would still collude as it generates enough profits to 
pay the claim. Such welfare-increasing collusion could indicate that the emission standards are 
too stringent; collusion increases efficiency but does so by harming other market participants.
However, the actual policy environment is not necessarily collusion-proof. If λ ∈(0, 1), then 
collusion increases the working group profits less than it harms the rest of the society. This is 
where our empirical case falls. The residual claim, as reported in Table 8, is −e 1.77 billion 
when we compare the collusive outcome to a noncompliant non-cooperative scenario and
−e 5.98 billion when the comparison is with compliance. We estimate λ to be 0.11 and 0.07
52. The residual claim is given to the working group rather than individual firms. If the working group finds a 
transfer scheme between firms that satisfy firm-specific participation constraints, the working group would be allowed 
to implement it (see Che and Kim, 2006).


===== [p.34] =====
68 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
in the two scenarios. We can interpret this in three different ways. First, firms would participate 
in the collusive proposal as long as the probability of being made the residual claimant is lower 
than λ. Second, firms would participate in the collusive proposal if they expect to be caught and 
pay at most λ of the residual claim. Third, (1 −λ) gives the lower bound on the distance of the 
existing regulatory environment from the residual claim policy.
Antitrust complements weakly enforced environmental regulation and brings the EU regu- 
latory environment closer to a residual claim policy. However, the antitrust fines imposed on 
the working group are not sufficient. While the antitrust fines are sufficient to repair welfare 
damages ex-post, they fall short of deterring welfare-decreasing collusion on noncompliance 
ex-ante.
8. CONCLUSION
We study the causes and welfare effects of firms coordinating on insufficient pollution abate- 
ment in response to imperfectly monitored environmental regulation. We examine the collusion 
among BMW, Daimler, and Volkswagen in restricting the effectiveness of their diesel NOx con- 
trol technologies since 2006. We build and estimate a structural model of vehicle demand and 
abatement choices, in which the incentive to coordinate on noncompliance stems from the ability 
to reduce expected penalties. Our welfare analysis reveals that the collusive benefits to automak- 
ers and car buyers come at the greater cost of NOx damages. Collusion reduces social welfare 
by between e 1.57–5.57 billion. The magnitude of the welfare damages the cartel inflicts on the 
rest of the society reaches between e 1.77–5.98 billion.
Although our analysis shows that antitrust is not stringent enough to prevent welfare- 
reducing collusion in the EU, we find an important complementary role of antitrust in enforcing 
regulation. Antitrust counteracts the reduction in the expected noncompliance penalty and 
reduces the benefits from collusion against regulation. However, using antitrust to complement 
environmental regulation has practical challenges. Unlike price collusion where the degree of 
overcharging provides the basis for fines and damages, coordinated noncompliance leads to 
overselling rather than overcharging. Prices are too low or product quality too high from a social 
perspective, which increases sales as well as pollution per unit sold. As such, the quantity sold 
and the additional pollution could form the basis of antitrust fines. The European Commission 
based fines on revenues from the relevant segment. There were no claims about the pollution, 
and the actual fines do not directly relate to a relevant welfare statistic (European Commission, 
2021). As discussed in Section 4, the European Commission has no legal authority to make state- 
ments about environmental compliance. This makes it challenging to set fines based on relevant 
welfare measures such as the residual claim and to rely on antitrust to complement environmen- 
tal regulation in the case of profitable coordination on noncompliance. In practice, the scope of 
antitrust would need to be broadened to allow explicit evaluation of noncompliance in order to 
have antitrust complement regulation.
Where antitrust is insufficient or has limited jurisdiction, welfare can be improved by an 
environmental policy that is robust against forces that reduce expected penalties for joint 
action. First, fines could increase with the number of noncompliant firms to undo the dif- 
fusion of reputation damages. This can be justified from a legal perspective with proof of 
explicit conspiracy. Second, policymakers could incentivize firms to reveal noncompliance, 
similar to leniency programs for price collusion, to reduce skin in the game. Third, inspec- 
tion decisions could incorporate the possibility that seemingly consistent abatement choices in 
the industry result from a joint scheme. Further research needs to investigate potential solu- 
tions to coordinated noncompliance, especially when regulation targets imperfectly competitive 
industries.


===== [p.35] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
69
Acknowledgments.
We thank the editor and three referees for their helpful and constructive comments and Mike 
Abito, Charles Angelucci, Megan Bailey, Ying Fan, Matt Gentzkow, Bob Gibbons, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Ginger 
Jin, Karam Kang, Ashley Langer, Ignacia Mercadal, Kostas Metaxoglou, Nate Miller, Juan-Pablo Montero, Stef Proost, 
Mar Reguant, Patrick Rey, Franc¸ois Salani´e, Chris Sullivan, Frank Verboven and seminar and conference participants 
for useful discussions and suggestions. Chunyu Guo provided excellent research assistance. Al´e-Chilet acknowledges 
funding from NSF-BSF grant number 2020690 and from ANID FONDECYT Iniciaci´on en Investigaci´on under grant 
11230007. Chen acknowledges support from the University at Albany Faculty Research Award Category A and the NSF 
under grant SES-2049446. Li acknowledges support from the NSF under grants SES-2049263 and SES-2434980. Rey- 
naert acknowledges funding from ANR under grant ANR-17-EURE-0010 (Investissements d’Avenir program) and grant 
ANR-CAREGUL-18-CE03-0004-01. Legal disclaimer: This work analyses an antitrust case strictly from an economic 
point of view. Our statements are based on the European Commission statements, media articles, and economic data. 
We do not discuss the legality of the firms’ actions.
Supplementary Data
Supplementary data are available at Review of Economic Studies online.
Data Availability
The data underlying this article are proprietary and are provided to the authors under license by Jato Analytics, PwC, 
and Emission Analytics. The replication package describes in detail how researchers can obtain access to the data and is 
available on Zenodo: http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14230848.
REFERENCES
ACEA (2024), “The Automobile Industry Pocket Guide 2023/2024”.
AL´E-CHILET, J. and ATAL, J. P. (2020), “Trade Associations and Collusion among Many Agents: Evidence from 
Physicians”, RAND Journal of Economics, 51, 1197–1221.
ALEXANDER, D. and SCHWANDT, H. (2022), “The Impact of Car Pollution on Infant and Child Health: Evidence 
from Emissions Cheating”, Review of Economic Studies, 89, 2872–2910.
ATER, I. and YOSEPH, N. (2022), “The Impact of Environmental Fraud on the Used Car Market: Evidence from 
Dieselgate”, Journal of Industrial Economics, 70, 463–491.
AURIOL, E. and LAFFONT, J.-J. (1992), “Regulation by Duopoly”, Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 1, 
507–533.
BACHMANN, R., EHRLICH, G., FAN, Y., et al. (2022), “Firms and Collective Reputation: A Study of the Volkswagen 
Emissions Scandal”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 21, 484–525.
BARON, D. P. and MYERSON, R. B. (1982), “Regulating a Monopolist with Unknown Costs”, Econometrica: Journal 
of the Econometric Society, 50, 911–930.
BERRY, S., LEVINSOHN, J. and PAKES, A. (1995), “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium”, Econometrica: 
Journal of the Econometric Society, 63, 841.
BERRY, S. T. (1994), “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation”, The Rand Journal of Economics,
25, 242–262.
BLUNDELL, W., GOWRISANKARAN, G. and LANGER, A. (2020), “Escalation of Scrutiny: The Gains from 
Dynamic Enforcement of Environmental Regulations”, American Economic Review, 110, 2558–85.
BOURREAU, M., SUN, Y. and VERBOVEN, F. (2021), “Market Entry, Fighting Brands and Tacit Collusion: Evidence 
from the French Mobile Telecommunications Market”, American Economic Review, 111, 3459–3499.
BRESNAHAN, T. F. (1987), “Competition and Collusion in the American Automobile Industry: The 1955 Price War”,
Journal of Industrial Economics, 35, 457–482.
CARDELL, N. S. (1997), “Variance Components Structures for the Extreme-Value and Logistic Distributions with 
Application to Models of Heterogeneity”, Econometric Theory, 13, 185–213.
CHE, Y.-K. and KIM, J. (2006), “Robustly Collusion-Proof Implementation”, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric 
Society, 74, 1063–1107.
CONLON, C. and GORTMAKER, J. (2020), “Best Practices for Differentiated Products Demand Estimation with 
PyBLP”, RAND Journal of Economics, 51, 1108–1161.
DOHMEN, F. and HAWRANEK, D. (2017), “The Cartel: Collusion Between Germany’s Biggest Carmakers”.
DUFLO, E., GREENSTONE, M., PANDE, R., et al. (2018), “The Value of Regulatory Discretion: Estimates From 
Environmental Inspections in India”, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 86, 2123–2160.
EARNHART, D. and FRIESEN, L. (2021), “Use of Competitive Endogenous Audit Mechanisms by Federal and State 
Inspectors Within Environmental Protection Agencies”, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 109, 
102476.
European Commission (2019), “Antitrust: Commission Sends Statement of Objections to BMW, Daimler 
and VW for Restricting Competition on Emission Cleaning Technology” https://ec.europa.eu/commission/ 
presscorner/detail/en/IP 19 2008 (accessed 21 September 2021).


===== [p.36] =====
70 
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
—— (2021), “Case AT.40178 - Car Emissions - Commission Decision of 8.7.2021”.
European Environment Agency (2015), “Air Quality in Europe—2015 Report” (Technical Report).
EWING, J. (2018), Faster, Higher, Farther: The Inside Story of the Volkswagen Scandal (New York, NY: W. W. 
Norteon & Company).
EWING, J. and GRANVILLE, K. (2019), “VW, BMW and Daimler Hindered Clean-Air Technology, European 
Regulator Says”.
GEARINO, D. (2020), “Love is Blind: How Germany’s Long Romance with Cars led to the Nation’s Biggest Clean 
Energy Failure”, Inside Climate News. https://insideclimatenews.org/news/11062020/germany-transportation-auto- 
industry-volkswagen-tesla-clean-energy/ (accessed 30 May 2024).
GIESEKE, J. and GERBANDY, G.-J. (2017), “Report on the Inquiry into Emission Measurements in the Automotive 
Sector” (Technical Report 2016/2215(INI), European Parliament).
GRIECO, P. L. E., MURRY, C. and YURUKOGLU, A. (2023), “The Evolution of Market Power in the U.S. Automobile 
Industry*”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 139, 1201–1253.
GRIGOLON, L. and VERBOVEN, F. (2014), “Nested Logit or Random Coefficients Logit? a Comparison of Alternative 
Discrete Choice Models of Product Differentiation”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 96, 916–935.
GROSS, D. P. (2020), “Collusive Investments in Technological Compatibility: Lessons from U.S. Railroads in the Late 
19th Century”, Management Science, 66, 5485–6064.
Health Effects Institute (2017), “State of Global Air 2017” (Technical Report).
HOLDERBAUM, B., KIND, M., MENNE, C., et al. (2015), “Potential for Euro 6 Passenger Cars with SCR to Meet 
RDE Requirements”, Internationales Wiener Motorensymposium, 36, 1–22.
HOLLAND, S. P., MANSUR, E. T., MULLER, N. Z., et al. (2016), “Damages and Expected Deaths Due to Excess NOx 
Emissions from 2009 to 2015 Volkswagen Diesel Vehicles”, Environmental Science and Technology, 50, 1111–1117.
IGAMI, M. and SUGAYA, T. (2022), “Measuring the Incentive to Collude: The Vitamin Cartels, 1990–99”, Review of 
Economic Studies, 89, 1460–1494.
JACOBSEN, M. R., SALLEE, J. M., SHAPIRO, J., et al. (2023), ”Regulating untaxable externalities: Are vehicle air 
pollution standards effective and efficient?”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 138, 1907–1976.
KANG, K. and SILVEIRA, B. S. (2021), “Understanding Disparities in Punishment: Regulator Preferences and 
Expertise”, Journal of Political Economy, 129, 2947–2992.
LAFFONT, J.-J. and MARTIMORT, D. (1997), “Collusion Under Asymmetric Information”, Econometrica: Journal of 
the Econometric Society, 65, 875–911.
—— —— (2000), “Mechanism Design with Collusion and Correlation”, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric 
Society, 68, 309–342.
LI, J. (2023), “Compatibility and Investment in the U.S. Electric Vehicle Market”.
MILLER, N. H. and WEINBERG, M. C. (2017), “Understanding the Price Effects of the MillerCoors Joint Venture”,
Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 85, 1763–1791.
MIRAVETE, E. J., MORAL, M. J. and THURK, J. (2018), “Fuel Taxation, Emissions Policy, and Competitive 
Advantage in the Diffusion of European Diesel Automobiles”, The Rand Journal of Economics, 49, 504–540.
NOCKE, V. (2007), “Collusion and Dynamic (Under-)Investment in Quality”, The Rand Journal of Economics, 38, 
227–249.
OLDENKAMP, R., VAN ZELM, R. and HUIJBREGTS, M. A. (2016), “Valuing the Human Health Damage Caused by 
the Fraud of Volkswagen”, Environmental Pollution, 212, 121–127.
OP DE BEECK, J., THOMPSON, J. and BOOTH, N. (2013), “Upcoming Emission Regulations for Passenger Cars: 
Impact on SCR System Requirements and Developments” (SAE Technical Papers, 2).
PORTER, R. H. (1983), “A Study of Cartel Stability: The Joint Executive Committee, 1880–1886”, The Bell Journal of 
Economics, 14, 301–314.
POSANER, J., MULLER, F. and HERVEY, G. (2017), “Too Big to Fail: Why Germany’s Autostate Keeps Winning”
Politico.
RAI, A. S. and SJ ¨OSTR ¨OM, T. (2004), “Is Grameen Lending Efficient? Repayment Incentives and Insurance in Village 
Economies”, Review of Economic Studies, 71, 217–234.
REMMY, K. (2022), “Adjustable Product Attributes, Indirect Network Effects, and Subsidy Design: The Case of Electric 
Vehicles” University of Bonn and University of Mannheim, Germany.
REYNAERT, M. (2021), “Abatement Strategies and the Cost of Environmental Regulation: Emission Standards on the 
European Car Market”, The Review of Economic Studies, 88, 454–488.
REYNAERT, M. and SALLEE, J. M. (2021), “Who Benefits When Firms Game Corrective Policies?” American 
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 13, 372–412.
REYNAERT, M. and VERBOVEN, F. (2014), “Improving the Performance of Random Coefficients Demand Models: 
The Role of Optimal Instruments”, Journal of Econometrics, 179, 83–98.
SALA, R., KRASOWSKI, J., DZIDA, J., et al. (2018), “Experiment of Selective Catalytic Reduction Retrofit for Euro 
6 NOx Emission Level Compliance for Euro 5 Light Duty Vehicle”, IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and 
Engineering, 421, 042070.
SANCHEZ, F. P., BANDIVADEKAR, A. and GERMAN, J. (2012), “Estimated Cost of Emission Reduction Technolo- 
gies for LDVs” (Technical Report, The International Council on Clean Transportation).
SHAPIRO, C. (2001), “Setting Compatible Standards: Coordination or Collusion?” in Expanding the Bounds of 
Intellectual Property (Oxford University Press) 81–101.
SHLEIFER, A. (1985), “A Theory of Yardstick Competition”, The Rand Journal of Economics, 16, 319–327.


===== [p.37] =====
Al´e-Chilet et al.
COLLUDING AGAINST ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
71
SULLIVAN, C. (2020), “Split Apart: Differentiation, Diversion, and Coordination in the Market for Superpremium Ice 
Cream”, AEA Papers and Proceedings, 110, 573–78.
TANGER ˚AS, T. P. (2002), “Collusion-proof Yardstick Competition”, Journal of Public Economics, 83, 231–254.
VILLAS-BOAS, S. B. (2007), “Vertical Relationships between Manufacturers and Retailers: Inference with Limited 
Data”, Review of Economic Studies, 74, 625–652.
WEITZMAN, M. L. (1974), “Price vs. Quantities”, Review of Economic Studies, 41, 477–491.
WHITEFOOT, K. S., FOWLIE, M. L. and SKERLOS, S. J. (2017), “Compliance by Design: Influence of Accelera- 
tion Trade-Offs on co2 Emissions and Costs of Fuel Economy and Greenhouse gas Regulations”, Environmental 
Science & Technology, 51, 10307–10315. PMID: 28825797.
YANG, L., FRANCO, V., CAMPESTRINI, A., et al. (2015), “NOX Control Technologies for Euro 6 Diesel Passenger 
Cars: Market Penetration and Experimental Performance Assessment (White Paper)” (Technical Report, International 
Council on Clean Transportation).
