

===== [PAGE 1] =====

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
ATTRIBUTE-BASED SUBSIDIES AND MARKET POWER:
AN APPLICATION TO ELECTRIC VEHICLES
Panle Jia Barwick
Hyuk-Soo Kwon
Shanjun Li
Working Paper 32264
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32264
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2024
We thank seminar participants at the 2021 Econometrica Society Summer Meeting, 2022 NBER 
EEE summer institute, Berkeley-Harvard-Yale joint environmental economics seminar, Caltech, 
Chicago IO+ Conference, Columbia University, ETH Zurich, ITAM, Jinan University, Michigan 
State University, Peking University, Santa Clara University, Stanford, Stony Brook University, 
Sun Yat-Sen University, Toulouse School of Economics, Tsinghua University, UC-Berkeley, 
UCLA, University of Aberdeen, University of British Columbia, University of Chicago, 
University of Mannheim, University of Oklahoma, University of Pennsylvania, Toronto, UT-
Austin, UW- Madison, Virtual International Seminar in Environmental and Energy Economics, 
and Zhejiang University as well as Hunt Allcott, Luming Chen, Jack Collison, Pierre Dubois, 
Larry Goulder, Sébastien Houde, Koichiro Ito, Mark Jacobsen, Ryan Kellogg, Youming Liu, 
Charles Murry, Francesca Molinari, James Sallee, Binglin Wang, Yucheng Wang, Tom 
Wollmann, and Tianli Xia for helpful comments. Jinge Li, Yiding Ma, and Binglin Wang 
provided excellent research assistance. There is no relevant materials and financial relationship to 
disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official NBER publications.
© 2024 by Panle Jia Barwick, Hyuk-Soo Kwon, and Shanjun Li. All rights reserved. Short 
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission 
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.


===== [PAGE 2] =====

Attribute-based Subsidies and Market Power: an Application to Electric Vehicles
Panle Jia Barwick, Hyuk-Soo Kwon, and Shanjun Li
NBER Working Paper No. 32264
March 2024
JEL No. L13,L52,L62,Q58
ABSTRACT
Attribute-based subsidies (ABS) are commonly used to promote the diffusion of energy-efficient 
products, whose manufacturers often wield significant market power. We develop a theoretical 
framework for the optimal design of ABS to account for endogenous product attributes, 
environmental externalities, and market power. We then estimate an equilibrium model of China's 
vehicle market under ABS and conduct counterfactual simulations to evaluate the welfare 
impacts of various subsidy designs. Compared to the uniform subsidies, ABS lead to higher 
product quality and are more effective in mitigating quantity distortions, albeit with a modest 
environmental cost. Between 42% to 62% of welfare gains under ABS relative to uniform 
subsidies are attributed to more desirable product attributes, with the remainder explained by 
reductions in market power distortions. Allowing subsidy redistribution through product-level 
subsidies, as suggested by our theoretical model, further enhances welfare gains by an additional 
34%to 62%. Among the ABS designs, China's notched subsidy design based on driving range 
leads to vehicle downsizing that undermines welfare benefits. Subsidies based on battery 
capacity, as implemented in the U.S., achieve the highest welfare gains by effectively balancing 
market power and environmental impacts.
Panle Jia Barwick
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Department of Economics
1180 Observatory Dr
Madison, WI 53706
and CEPR
and also NBER
panle.barwick@gmail.com
Hyuk-Soo Kwon
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research 
Stanford University
hskwon.econ@gmail.com
Shanjun Li
Cornell University
405 Warren Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
SL2448@cornell.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w32264


===== [PAGE 3] =====

1
Introduction
Attribute-based regulations are common across industries and countries, where the intensity of reg-
ulations is contingent upon speciﬁc attributes of the entities being regulated. Prominent examples
in the environmental and energy areas include Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards for
passenger vehicles, the New Source Review Program for power plants, and consumer subsidies for
energy efﬁcient products (Stavins, 2006). While existing research has investigated the advantages
of attribute-based regulations (Ito and Sallee, 2018; Kellogg, 2018), the literature has largely ab-
stracted away from ﬁrms’ market power, a common feature in markets subject to attribute-based
regulations. Our paper bridges this gap and analyzes both theoretically and empirically the optimal
design of attribute-based subsidies (ABS), one type of attribute-based regulations, in oligopolistic
industries. To the best of our knowledge, our framework represents the ﬁrst attempt in the literature
to incorporate three key features — namely market power, externalities, and endogenous attributes
of products by multi-product ﬁrms — in the context of attribute-based policy design.
ABS in our setting take the form of a two-part subsidy (i.e., a two-part tariff): a base sub-
sidy that is the same across products and a variable subsidy that is tied to product attributes. This
is common in practice and standard in the theoretical literature. Our theoretical analyses begin
by considering an ideal benchmark where a government can perfectly target the environmental
externality and faces no budget constraints, and there is a single-product monopoly. It is straight-
forward to show that the government can achieve the ﬁrst-best social outcome with a Pigouvian
policy design, where the base subsidy fully addresses quantity distortion, and the variable subsidy
corrects environmental externality. In practice, all three assumptions are likely violated. Environ-
mental externality may be hard to quantify and target, governments face limited budgets, and many
industries are characterized by differentiated product oligopolies.
When a government has a limited budget, it is sub-optimal to tie the variable subsidy to en-
vironmental externality as prescribed by the traditional Pigouvian subsidy. This would entail a
limited base subsidy to address market power distortions when the budget constraint is binding.
We show that the optimal policy design for a single-product monopoly is characterized by the
contract curve between the social surplus indifference curves and the private surplus indifference
curves in the product attribute space. Under multi-product oligopolies, optimality conditions re-
quire higher subsidies to products that exhibit potentially high welfare gains for the marginal unit
and products whose demand is more responsive to subsidies in order to equalize the marginal social
surplus generated by each subsidy dollar across all products.
The theoretical characterization of optimal policy design crucially hinges on the underlying
consumer preferences and production technology. With the theoretical insights in hand, we turn to
1


===== [PAGE 4] =====

the empirical analysis of the market for electric vehicles (EVs). Together with a cleaner electricity
grid, EVs offer considerable promise for reducing carbon emissions and local air pollution. Many
governments have provided generous consumer purchase subsidies, with global public spending on
consumer EV subsidies approaching $30 billion in 2021 (IEA, 2022). The design of these subsidies
varies across countries. Some countries tie the subsidy amount to vehicle attributes, such as driving
range in China and Japan, battery capacity in the U.S. and India, and vehicle size and weight in
South Korea. Other countries offer uniform subsidies, as seen in Germany, the Netherlands, and
Sweden. Our analysis focuses on China, by far the world’s largest automobile and EV market,
accounting for 40% of global new passenger vehicle sales and 60% of global EV sales in 2022.
We estimate an equilibrium model of the Chinese automobile market by extending the frame-
work in Berry et al. (1995) to incorporate endogenous attributes. Our model allows ﬁrms to change
product designs in response to subsidy schemes, which is a crucial factor in the welfare impacts
and policy comparisons. The demand side captures rich consumer preference heterogeneity and
controls for extensive ﬁxed effects to capture local variations that affect demand for EVs and ICEs.
On the supply side, ﬁrms choose prices and design vehicle attributes (battery capacity and vehicle
weight net of battery) for EVs to maximize proﬁts. Crucially, both the marginal and ﬁxed cost of
production depend on vehicle attributes.
To estimate consumer preferences, we utilize China’s notched subsidy design, where the sub-
sidy amount is a step-wise function of the driving range and varies across vehicle models and
over time. This design creates a regression discontinuity type of variation that facilitates the iden-
tiﬁcation of consumer preference. In addition, we employ cost-side shifters as instruments for
endogenous product attributes, such as information on battery suppliers which affects costs but are
unlikely to directly affect demand. On the supply side, we use variation in prices (after controlling
for markups) and the attributes chosen by ﬁrms to recover the curvature of the variable and ﬁxed
cost of production with respect to attributes. Variations in various taxes and demand shifters serve
as powerful instruments for product attributes that could be correlated with cost shocks.
With model primitives estimated, we next conduct counterfactual simulations to compare the
uniform subsidy (which does not target attributes) with commonly used ABS, such as those based
on driving range, battery capacity, and vehicle weight. Solving the industry equilibrium for a given
policy design requires ﬁnding new prices for hundreds of EVs and ICEs as well as new attributes
for all EVs. Searching for the optimal policy design that maximizes social surplus necessitates
solving the industry equilibrium hundreds of times. To address computational challenges, we
design an iterative Newton–Raphson algorithm that greatly speeds up the solution process.
Our counterfactual simulations provide several key ﬁndings. First, China’s notched subsidy
2


===== [PAGE 5] =====

design leads to a large welfare loss relative to a linear subsidy, consistent with ﬁndings in the public
ﬁnance literature. Compared to a linear subsidy, the current policy generates excess bunching at
the range cutoffs and distorts automakers’ choices of vehicle weight and battery capacity to reach
the cutoffs. On the other hand, it provides no incentives for ﬁrms to improve the driving range
between the cutoffs.
Second, ABS generates signiﬁcant gains in consumer surplus relative to the uniform subsidy,
ranging from ¥226 million in 2017 under the notched range-based design to ¥643 and ¥680
million under capacity- and weight-subsidies, respectively. ABS induces more desirable vehicle
attributes and more effectively addresses quantity distortions than the uniform subsidy. The in-
crease in consumer surplus is relatively modest for range-based policies because it leads to vehicle
downsizing, which is undesirable to consumers. Firms producing BEVs also beneﬁt from the
ABS design that redistributes subsidies from the low-end spectrum of the vehicle attribute space
to the high-end spectrum, though such proﬁt gains are an order of magnitude smaller than in-
creases in consumer surplus and are more than offset by proﬁt losses of ICEs. The environmental
performance of the EV ﬂeet deteriorates moderately under ABS as sales shift to larger and less
environmentally friendly EVs. In total, ABS designs result in signiﬁcant welfare gains compared
to the uniform subsidy, ranging from ¥97.2 million under the current notched range subsidy to
¥448 million under the capacity subsidy in 2017.
Third, a decomposition exercise indicates that changes in vehicle attributes account for 42-
62% of total welfare gains under ABS relative to the uniform subsidy. The reduction in market
power distortions explains the remaining 38% to 58% of the welfare gains. Allowing subsidy
redistribution at the product level, as suggested by the theoretical discussions, further enhances
welfare gains by another 34% to 62%. Fixing vehicle attributes, as is commonly done in the
literature, signiﬁcantly understates aggregate welfare gains and leads to the erroneous conclusion
that ﬁrm proﬁt increases for the auto sector. These ﬁndings underscore the role of endogenous
product attributes in understanding the impacts of attribute-based subsidies.
Our study contributes to four strands of literature. First, our paper advances the emerging lit-
erature on attribute-based regulations and imperfect corrective policies.1 Relative to non-attribute-
based regulations, attribute-based regulations could exhibit efﬁciency advantages by reducing abate-
ment costs across heterogeneous ﬁrms and mitigating demand uncertainty (Ito and Sallee, 2018;
Kellogg, 2018, 2020). While the previous studies abstract away market power, our study con-
tributes to this literature by examining the welfare implications of attribute-based regulations under
1Jacobsen et al. (2020) provides an intuitive and easy-to-implement method to quantify the efﬁciency loss from
imperfect corrective policies under the perfectly competitive assumption: the R2 from a regression of true externalities
on the policy attribute/variable measures the welfare gain from the imperfect policies relative to policy ideals.
3


===== [PAGE 6] =====

imperfectly competitive markets.2 Both our theoretical model and empirical analysis highlight the
important tradeoff between market power and environmental externalities in policy design.
Second, our study adds to the large literature on the effects of subsidies on energy-efﬁcient
products, such as alternative-fuel vehicles (Beresteanu and Li, 2011; Sallee, 2011; Li et al., 2017a;
Kiso, 2021; Springel, 2019; Remmy, 2022; Kwon, 2023; Wang and Xing, 2023), home appliances
(Boomhower and Davis, 2014; Houde and Aldy, 2017), and residential solar panels (Gillingham
and Tsvetanov, 2019; Pless and van Benthem, 2019; Langer and Lemoine, 2018). These studies
focus on understanding demand responses to subsidies and identifying policy elements that could
increase consumer and ﬁrm adoption. Unlike these studies, our analysis also examines the impact
of subsidies on product attributes. Echoing the literature on endogenous attributes (Fan, 2013;
Fan and Yang, 2016; Wollmann, 2018; Crawford et al., 2019; Barahona et al., 2023), our ﬁndings
illustrate the important welfare and policy implications of ﬁrms’ ability to choose product designs
in response to government policies.
Third, our study contributes to the literature that examines the impacts of government policies
on the passenger vehicle market. Earlier studies have documented the changes in vehicle attributes
and technology adoption in response to the U.S. fuel economy regulations (Knittel, 2011; Anderson
et al., 2011; Klier and Linn, 2016). Our study is more closely related to studies that endogenize
product attributes in response to the fuel economy and carbon emissions regulations or government
bailout (Klier and Linn, 2012; Whitefoot et al., 2017; Wollmann, 2018; Reynaert, 2021; Leard et
al., 2023). Our paper sheds light on the underlying forces of the optimal subsidy design in the
presence of market power and multi-product oligopoly and compares equilibrium outcomes under
different designs.
Lastly, our paper is related to the literature on pollution control in the presence of other dis-
tortions. The literature shows that the efﬁciency of environmental taxes could be compromised by
pre-existing distortions such as market power (Buchanan, 1969; Barnett, 1980), distortionary taxes
(Bovenberg and Goulder, 1996; Goulder et al., 1997), and imperfect information and consumer
inattention (Allcott and Taubinsky, 2015; Allcott and Sunstein, 2015). Our study is also closely re-
lated to Fowlie et al. (2016), which documents that market-based emission regulations in the U.S.
cement industry affect ﬁrm entry and exit, and exacerbate distortions from market power. Our pa-
per contributes to this literature by emphasizing the importance of endogenous product attributes,
which affect social welfare through both environmental externalities and quantity distortion.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical characterization of an optimal
policy design. Section 3 explains the policy background and provides descriptive data evidence.
2A recent exception is Kiso (2021) which shows that a subsidy design where the amount of subsidy is inversely
related to product prices could reduce ﬁrm market power and improve the cost-effectiveness of the subsidy program.
4


===== [PAGE 7] =====

Section 4 and Section 5 discuss the empirical framework and estimation results. Section 6 conducts
the counterfactual simulations and welfare decomposition. Section 7 concludes.
2
Theoretical Framework
In this section, we present a theoretical framework for optimal attribute-based subsidies to address
environmental externalities in the presence of market power and endogenous attributes. As a key
departure from the literature of pollution control under market power (Buchanan, 1969; Barnett,
1980; Fowlie et al., 2016), ﬁrms respond to government policies by changing both prices and
product attributes in our model. A product (e.g., an EV) is characterized by a K-element attribute
vector x = (x1, x2, ... , xK). Both consumer willingness-to-pay (WTP) in monetary terms, B(x),
and the marginal cost of production, C(x), depend on product attributes. The product generates
environmental externalities represented as φ · e(x) per unit of output, where φ is a scalar and
reﬂects the marginal social beneﬁt or damage of the environmental externality. For EVs, e(x)
represents emission reductions relative to the dirty alternatives and φ ·e(x) captures health beneﬁts
and other positive externalities. The aggregate demand for the product is denoted by Q(P, x),
where P is the product price.
Throughout the theoretical analysis, we assume that consumer WTP for the product attributes
B(x) is additively separable from the price disutility in demand:
Q(P, x) = Q
 P−B(x)

.
This demand function is motivated by discrete choice models where utility depends on prices and
attributes additively. Allowing for arbitrary interactions between B(x) and product prices P with
multi-product oligopolies presents signiﬁcant challenges, with the equilibrium existence in this
setting only recently established.3 As we illustrate below, the additive separability makes the ﬁrms’
choices of prices and attributes independent and greatly simpliﬁes the model. Most importantly,
it enables us to characterize the optimal policy design in the presence of market power, which has
not been done in the literature. A limitation of the additivity assumption is that the marginal value
of product attributes is the same across consumers, which rules out the Spence distortion in quality
provision (Spence, 1975). While our theoretical model abstracts away from the Spence distortion,
3This is achieved in Chade and Swinkels (2021) under the assumptions of quasi-linear preferences and ranked
production costs. That is, a low-quality ﬁrm has an advantage in producing low-quality goods, and a high-quality
ﬁrm has an advantage in producing high-quality goods. In addition, consumers’ WTP for quality increases with their
private type. Analyzing optimal policy design with general preferences and production technology remains an open
question.
5


===== [PAGE 8] =====

the empirical analysis adopts a much richer demand system that allows heterogeneous marginal
values of product attributes across consumers. We discuss the importance of the Spence distortion
for the counterfactual analyses in Section 6.
The theoretical analysis compares the privately and socially optimal outcomes and discusses
the choice of policy instruments to rectify market failures with and without a government budget
constraint.4 To build intuition, we ﬁrst analyze the baseline case of a single-product monopoly
before extending our results to an oligopoly with differentiated products.
2.1
Choices by Monopoly and Social Planner
Consider a monopoly that chooses price and attributes to maximize proﬁt:
max
P, x

P−C(x)

Q
 P−B(x)

.
The privately optimal price Pm and attributes xo satisfy the following ﬁrst-order conditions:
[P] :
Pm −C(xo)
Pm
=
1
εP(Pm, xo),
(1)
[xk] :
Bk(xo)−Ck(xo) = 0 for k = 1,2,...,K,
(2)
where εP(P, x) is the price elasticity of demand. The subscript k in Equation (2) stands for the
partial derivative with respect to the k-th element of x.5 We use xo to denote the monopolist’s
choices absent government intervention. The additive B(x) and P in aggregate demand, together
with a marginal cost that is constant in quantity, makes the ﬁrm’s choices of attributes independent
of price.6 The monopolist’s decision becomes a two-stage problem: it ﬁrst selects attributes that
maximize the per-unit private surplus, B(x) −C(x), and then sets the price to extract as much
consumer surplus as possible.
The social planner maximizes the social welfare that consists of consumer surplus, producer
4Government subsidies are transfers and do not directly affect social welfare except through changing product
attributes and quantity. We abstract from distortionary taxes.
5The setup can accommodate monopoly, monopolistic competition, and a perfectly competitive environment. With
monopolistic competition, Q(·) denotes the ﬁrm’s residual demand. With perfect competition, the ﬁrm’s demand
becomes ﬂat, and εP(P, x) approaches inﬁnity, yielding a markup of zero, i.e., P−C(x) = 0.
6To see the intuition, consider a simple change of variables. Deﬁne ¯P = P −B(x), which can be interpreted as a
base price with the minimum quality. The proﬁt equation becomes ( ¯P + B(x) −C(x))Q( ¯P), thus the optimal choice
of attributes is independent of price.
6


===== [PAGE 9] =====

surplus, and the externality:
SW(P, x) =
Z Q(P, x)
0
[B(x)+Q−1(s)−P]ds
|
{z
}
Consumer surplus
+
 P−C(x)

Q(P, x)
|
{z
}
Producer surplus
+φ ·e(x)Q(P, x)
|
{z
}
Externality
,
where Q−1(.) is the inverse of Q(P−B(x)). The socially optimal price P∗and attributes x∗satisfy
the following ﬁrst-order conditions:
[P] :
P∗−C(x∗)+φ ·e(x∗) = 0,
(3)
[xk] :
Bk(x∗)−Ck(x∗)+φ ·ek(x∗) = 0 for k = 1,2,...,K.
(4)
The derivation of Equations (3) and (4) is in Appendix A.1. The ﬁrst-order conditions differ
from Equations (1) and (2) because attributes are chosen to maximize per-unit social surplus,
B(x) −C(x) + φ · e(x), and price reﬂects the social cost of production, C(x∗) −φ · e(x∗). The
socially optimal price P∗eliminates the quantity distortion at the socially optimal attributes x∗that
internalize the environmental externality.
To facilitate graphical illustrations, we assume the attribute space is two-dimensional. Figure 1
displays the differences in price, attributes, quantity, and social welfare between the privately and
socially optimal solutions. Panel (a) depicts the attribute space with two attributes: x1 and x2. The
top dotted contour lines are iso-quant curves for the social surplus, B(x)−C(x)+φ ·e(x), while
the bottom dashed contour lines represent the iso-quant curves for the private surplus, B(x)−C(x).
The monopolist chooses xo, which is privately optimal, while the planner’s choice, x∗, has a larger
environmental beneﬁt and is socially optimal.
Panels (b) to (d) plot the demand and supply curves, deadweight losses, and social surplus in
the product market. Panel (b) draws the demand and supply curves that are associated with the
attributes chosen by the monopolist. The red triangle labeled as DWL1 is the deadweight loss from
the suboptimal quantity, Qm(·), due to market power and the positive environmental externality.
This is standard in the literature. Panel (c) adds demand and supply at the socially optimal at-
tributes. We plot the non-trivial case where the demand curve associated with the socially optimal
attributes x∗shifts to the left relative to that for xo at any given price level. While x∗reﬂects the
socially optimal and environmentally friendly design, xo is more appealing to consumers.7 The
ﬁrst-best outcome is given by (x∗, P∗(x∗), Q∗(x∗)).
Panel (d) illustrates the welfare loss from the monopoly relative to the ﬁrst-best outcome. The
7By construction, since xo maximizes the private surplus and x∗maximizes the social surplus, the cost curve
C(x∗) is above C(xo) while the social cost curve C(x∗)−φ ·e(x∗) is below C(xo)−φ ·e(xo).
7


===== [PAGE 10] =====

deadweight loss labeled as DWL2 arises from distortions in both attributes (xo vs. x∗) and quantity
(Qm(·) vs. Q∗(·)). The difference between DWL1 in Panel (b) and DWL2 in Panel (d) represents
the additional deadweight losses as a result of product attribute distortions.
Attribute-based Subsidies
The social planner can use attribute-based subsidies to address dis-
tortions.8 Common subsidies consist of a two-part tariff, T +t ·z(x), where T is the base subsidy
invariant to attributes, t is the subsidy intensity, and z(x) is the policy attribute that depends on
product attributes. For example, the policy attribute is driving range in China (which is a function
of vehicle weight and battery capacity) and battery capacity in the U.S..9 With attribute-based
subsidies, the ﬁrm’s proﬁt maximization problem is:
max
P, x

P−C(x)+T +t ·z(x)

Q
 P−B(x)

(5)
[P] :
Pz −C(xz)+T +t ·z(xz)
Pz
=
1
εP(Pz, xz),
[xk] :
Bk(xz)−Ck(xz)+t ·zk(xz) = 0 for i = 1,2,...,K.
The solution to the proﬁt maximization problem is denoted by (Pz(T, t), xz(t)) for a given policy
triad (T,t,z). Note that the base subsidy T affects price but not product design. This is intuitive
as T is invariant to attributes. In contrast, both the subsidy intensity t and the policy attribute z(x)
affect product design. Given the monopolist’s response, the social planner chooses the optimal
policy instrument to maximize social welfare.
Perfect Targeting
We begin with a theoretical benchmark of perfect targeting, where the policy
attribute is proportional to the externality (e.g., z = e). It is simple to show that the government can
obtain the ﬁrst-best with perfect targeting. The proof is provided in Appendix A.1.
Proposition 1. Under perfect targeting (e.g., z = e), the per-unit subsidy following the two-part
structure T ∗+t∗· e(x), where t∗= φ and T ∗are chosen such that Pe(T ∗, φ) = C(xe(φ)) −φ ·
e(xe(φ)), achieves the socially ﬁrst-best outcome of Pe(T ∗, φ) = P∗and xe(φ) = x∗.
The optimal subsidy T ∗+t∗·e(x) is Pigouvian and incentivizes the monopolist to internalize the
environmental externality. The subsidy intensity t∗induces socially optimal attributes x∗, while
8The discussion focuses on subsidies because EVs generate positive externalities. Our framework also applies to
taxes that correct negative externalities.
9The formula for EV subsidies in the U.S. is $2500+$415*(kWh-4), with a minimum battery capacity of 4 kWh
and a maximum subsidy of $7500. China’s range-based subsidies have a notched design but can be approximated by
a two-part tariff (see Section 3). We evaluate the welfare distortions of the notched design in Section 6.
8


===== [PAGE 11] =====

the base subsidy T ∗offsets market power and leads to socially optimal quantity Q∗(x∗).10
The top two graphs of Figure 2 illustrate the optimal policy design. Panel (a) presents the
attribute space. Under perfect targeting z(x) = e(x), the ﬁrm’s response function is the straight
line that connects x∗and xo.11 A positive t pulls the ﬁrm to move closer to x∗, while a negative
t pushes the ﬁrm’s product design further away from x∗. The optimal subsidy intensity t∗induces
the monopolist to choose the socially optimal x∗. Panel (b) plots the product space. Under x∗and
the optimal base subsidy T ∗, the monopolist chooses the socially optimal price P∗(x∗) and quantity
Q∗(x∗). The green-shaded triangle represents the social welfare under the ﬁrst-best outcome. To
address distortions in both the attribute and product spaces, neither T nor t ·z(x) alone is sufﬁcient.
Imperfect Targeting
In practice, perfect targeting is rarely feasible. Under imperfect targeting
with z(x) ̸= e(x), the socially optimal attributes, x∗, are usually unattainable. In response to sub-
sidy T +t · z(x), the monopoly chooses attributes along the line that is determined by the policy
target z(x). The product attribute that achieves the highest per-unit social surplus under the policy
attribute z(x) is denoted by xz in Panel (c) of Figure 2. This is the tangency point between the
social surplus indifference curve and the ﬁrm’s response line. The subsidy intensity that achieves
xz is denoted by tz. Panel (d) depicts the equilibrium outcome in the product space. Given at-
tributes xz, the quantity that equates price with social marginal cost of production is Q∗(xz). The
government uses base subsidy T z to achieve Q∗(xz). The social surplus is smaller than in Panel
(b), reﬂecting the social planner’s inability to perfectly target externalities.
2.2
Attribute-based Regulations with Budget Constraints
The discussion thus far has implicitly assumed that the social planner has inﬁnite resources. In
practice, governments often face a limited budget, which results in a trade-off between reducing
the environmental externality and mitigating the quantity distortion. This section examines the
implications of a budget constraint on the optimal policy design.
Panel (a) of Figure 3 illustrates the tension between addressing environmental distortions and
quantity distortions for a given policy attribute z subject to a budget constraint. The equilibrium
attribute that maximizes social surplus under policy z without a budget constraint, denoted as
xz
w/o BC, is the tangency point between the ﬁrm’s response curve and the social surplus indifference
10Subsidies are transfers and do not directly affect social welfare except through changing product attributes and
price. We abstract away from the distortion of tax collection to fund subsidies.
11Following Ito and Sallee (2018), we use a quadratic loss function and assume the policy attribute z is linear in x.
These two assumptions imply that the iso-surplus curves are ellipses and that the monopoly chooses product attributes
along a straight line that passes through xo. See Appendix A.1 for details.
9


===== [PAGE 12] =====

curve. However, xz
w/o BC requires a large subsidy intensity t and leaves limited funds for the base
subsidy T to address quantity distortions. As shown in Appendix A.2, the equilibrium product
attribute associated with the optimal policy T and t that maximizes social welfare under z with
budget level R, xz
with BC=R, lies between the monopolist’s choice without intervention, xo, and
xz
w/o BC. The smaller the budget, the closer xz
with BC=R is to xo.
Before presenting the optimal policy design, we ﬁrst discuss a lemma showing that the per-
unit private surplus, B(x)−C(x), is closely related to the equilibrium quantity achievable under a
given budget constraint. It serves as a sufﬁcient statistic for a policy’s ability to address the quantity
distortion.
Lemma 1. Consider two policy triads (T,t,z) and (T ′,t′,z′) that satisfy the budget constraint R:

T +t ·z
 xz(t)

·Q
 Pz(T,t), xz(t)

=

T ′ +t′ ·z′ xz′(t′)

·Q
 Pz′(T ′,t′), xz′(t′)

= R. Then,
B
 xz(t)

−C
 xz(t)

⪌B
 xz′(t′)

−C
 xz′(t′)

implies Q
 Pz(T,t),xz(t)

⪌Q
 Pz′(T ′,t′), xz′(t′)

.
The proof of Lemma 1 is in Appendix A.2. Lemma 1 facilitates comparisons between different
policy triads. Suppose two policy triads (T,t,z) and (T ′,t,′ z′) entail identical government ex-
penses. If the policy triad (T,t,z) leads to product attributes with a higher per-unit private surplus
B
 xz(t)

−C
 xz(t)

, then the equilibrium quantity under (T,t,z) is higher as well.
This can be seen by rewriting ﬁrm proﬁt in Equation (5) using a change of variable ¯P = P −
B(x): π(·) = [ ¯P + B(x) −C(x) + T + t · z(x)]Q( ¯P). The effect of B(x) −C(x) on the proﬁt
is similar to that of the subsidy T + t · z(x). Intuitively, since higher per-unit subsidies lead to
higher sales, so does higher B(x) −C(x). As a higher quantity implies a lower deadweight loss,
B(x) −C(x) becomes a sufﬁcient statistic for the effectiveness of the policy triads to address
quantity distortions and deadweight loss under market power.
Lemma 1 is a stepping stone in establishing Proposition 2 below that characterizes the optimal
policy design with a budget constraint. Since the per-unit private surplus, B(x) −C(x), only de-
pends on product attributes, its sufﬁcient-statistics property allows us to depict quantity distortions
in the attribute space without referencing the product market. Higher iso-quant private surplus
curves represent equilibrium outcomes with lower quantity distortions. In the meantime, the per-
unit social surplus, B(x)−C(x)+φ ·e(x), captures the externality. Higher iso-quant social surplus
curves represent equilibrium outcomes that exhibit higher environmental beneﬁts. These two sets
of iso-quant curves capture the two types of distortions that the government tries to mitigate. This
intuition is the foundation of the characterization of the optimal policy design below.
10


===== [PAGE 13] =====

Optimal Policy Triads with budget constraints
Panel (b) of Figure 3 compares two policy
triads (T,t,z) and (T ′,t′,z′) that are associated with an identical budget R. The subsidy rates
(T,t) and (T ′,t′) are chosen optimally to maximize social welfare with budget R under z and z′,
respectively. Let xz
with BC=R denote the equilibrium outcome under policy triads (T,t,z). Suppose
it is not a tangent point between the social iso-quant curve of B(x)−C(x)+φ ·e(x) and the private
iso-quant curve of B(x)−C(x). The private iso-quant curve that passes xz
with BC=R intersects the
response curve under policy z′ at ˜x. Let ( ˜T, ˜t,z′) denote the policy triad that leads to equilibrium
outcome ˜x under budget R.12 By construction, policy triad (T ′,t′,z′) delivers a higher social
welfare than policy ( ˜T, ˜t,z′) with budget level R. We now show that policy ( ˜T, ˜t,z′) achieves
higher social welfare than (T,t,z). Since their corresponding equilibrium product attributes ˜x and
xz
with BC=R are on the same private iso-quant curve with budget R, they lead to the same equilibrium
quantity in the product market (by Lemma 1). However, ˜x is on a higher social iso-quant curve and
hence delivers more environmental beneﬁts than xz
with BC=R. Hency, policy triad ( ˜T, ˜t,z′) achieves
higher social welfare than (T,t,z). By induction, (T ′,t′,z′) dominates ( ˜T, ˜t,z′), which in turn
dominates (T,t,z) in terms of social welfare. In fact, the social planner can do better than (T ′,t′,z′),
as prescribed by Proposition 2 below.
Proposition 2. Deﬁne the contract curve as the collection of tangent points of the iso-social- and
iso-private-surplus curves with xo and x∗as the two endpoints.
i) If a policy triad (T R, tR, zR) maximizes the social welfare for a given budget R, its equilib-
rium product attribute xzR(tR) lies on the contract curve.
ii) If a product attribute x is on the contract curve, there exists a budget level R and correspond-
ing optimal policy triad (T R, tR, zR) such that the equilibrium product attribute xzR(tR) is
equal to x.
iii) As R increases, xzR(tR) moves away from xo towards x∗along the contract curve.
The proof is in Appendix A.2. Proposition 2 argues that the optimal policy designs are associ-
ated with the product attributes that are the tangent points between the iso-social- and iso-private-
surplus curves. In addition, every point on the contract curve is associated with an optimal policy
design. Suppose an optimal policy design results in an equilibrium product attribute not on the
contract curve. By the argument above, there exists at least one policy design that generates higher
social welfare, and vice versa.
12The subsidy intensity ˜t induces the monopoly to choose ˜x under policy target z′. The corresponding base subsidy
˜T is determined by ˜t and z′ given R.
11


===== [PAGE 14] =====

Panel (c) of Figure 3 draws four tangency points: x1, x2, x3, and x4, each of which represents
an equilibrium attribute vector under a different budget. The four lines passing through them
represent the associated policy attributes, {z1,z2,z3,z4}. The corresponding budget level is denoted
by {R1,R2,R3,R4}. Proposition 2 implies that a higher level of budget is needed to move from x1
to x4: R1 < R2 < R3 < R4. The contract curve represents product attributes that are associated with
the constrained optimal policy triads (T,t,z) with different budget levels. As the budget increases,
the planner’s choice moves towards x∗to focus more on the environmental externality, given the
increased ability (via subsidies) to tackle market power with a higher budget.
2.3
Oligopoly with Differentiated Products
While the setting of a single-product monopoly helps illustrate the trade-offs between mitigating
different sources of distortions with a budget constraint, most industries subject to ABS operate
in an oligopolistic market structure with differentiated products. In these situations, the extent
of quantity distortion and environmental externalities differ across products, making the optimal
allocation of subsidies among products an important consideration.
Suppose there are J products ( j = 1, ... , J) with characteristics x j, consumer beneﬁt B(x j),
marginal cost Cj, and demand Qj. Assume that the social planner can allocate the budget across
products using product-speciﬁc subsidies b j = Tj +t · z(x j), where ∑j bjQ j = R. Appendix A.3
shows that the optimal subsidy allocation can be characterized as follows:
b j = µ ·m j ·
εb
j j +∑k̸=j
mkQk
m jQ j εb
k j
1+εb
j j +∑k̸=j
bkQk
bjQ j εb
k j
for j = 1, ..., J,
(6)
where µ > 0 is the inverse of the shadow value of the budget constraint and is the same across all
products, and m j = Pj −Cj(x j)+φ ·e(x j) is the social markup of product j. Lastly, εb
k j = ∂Qk
∂b j
bj
Qk
is the demand elasticity of product k with respect to the subsidy for product j. With independent
demand, Equation (6) simpliﬁes to bj = µ · mj ·
εb
j j
1+εb
j j . This formula is intuitive. It indicates that
we should allocate more subsidies to products that exhibit potentially high welfare gains for the
marginal unit and whose demand is responsive to subsidies. Such an allocation will ensure that the
marginal social surplus generated by the last dollar of subsidy is equalized across products.
Equation (6) requires a product-speciﬁc base subsidy Tj, which may be politically and ad-
ministratively challenging. Appendix A.3 describes the ﬁrst-order conditions that characterize the
optimal policy triad (T,t,z), though there is no analytic formula given the complexity. Nonethe-
less, the theoretical results highlight three critical roles of an optimal policy design: encourage
12


===== [PAGE 15] =====

quantity expansion, incentivize the provision of environmentally friendly attributes, and allocate
subsidies across differentiated products.
2.4
Discussions
Our theoretical framework illustrates the trade-off between addressing environmental externali-
ties and mitigating market power under a limited budget. The optimal policy triad (T,t,z) needs
to strike the right balance to address these two market failures with differentiated products and
varying degrees of distortions. In any speciﬁc context, the optimal subsidy design is ultimately
an empirical question and hinges on consumer preferences, production costs, environmental exter-
nalities, and the nature of competition. Our empirical analysis incorporates these key objects to
compare different policy designs in terms of their impacts on market outcomes and social welfare.
It is worth noting that while our theoretical model abstracts away from the Spence distortion,
the presence of such a distortion provides another rationale for implementing ABS in industries
with oligopolies and heterogeneous consumers. This is because the privately chosen attributes x
might not maximize the aggregate B(x)−C(x) in a society with heterogeneous consumers, leading
to quality distortion. In these contexts, ABS has the potential to also address quality distortion, as
demonstrated in Section 6.
3
Background and Data
In this section, we discuss the industry background, describe the data, and present stylized facts
that motivate the structural analyses in Section 4.
3.1
Industry and Policy Background
Since the introduction of mass-market EV models in 2010, worldwide passenger EV sales reached
10.2 million units, or 14% of the passenger vehicle market in 2022. Many countries have outlined
aggressive goals to electrify passenger transportation (Appendix Figure A2). Norway aims to
achieve 100% electric among new vehicle sales by 2025, the Netherlands 100% by 2030, the U.S.
50% by 2030, and China 40% by 2030. The market share of EVs among new vehicle sales in these
countries in 2022 was 90%, 35%, 7%, and 29%, respectively.
China became the largest EV market in 2015, and its global share increased to 60% by 2022
(Appendix Figure A3). More than half of all EVs on the road worldwide were in China. While
there was a proliferation of EV producers with many brands in 2022, the market remains concen-
13


===== [PAGE 16] =====

trated with the top ﬁve EV ﬁrms accounting for 55% of the market.13 The largest EV ﬁrm, BYD,
had a market share of nearly 30% in 2022. In comparison, the number of EV brands in the U.S.
was 40 in 2022. The U.S. market was more concentrated, with Tesla accounting for over 45% and
the top ﬁve ﬁrms accounting for about 80% of the market in 2022.
The rapid growth of the EV market in China was at least partly driven by the generous con-
sumer subsidies from both central and local governments as well as non-ﬁnancial incentives as
documented in Li et al. (2022). The Chinese government considers the EV sector a strategic prior-
ity to increase the global competitiveness of its domestic automobile industry and to reduce energy
consumption and emissions from the transportation sector. Accelerating EV adoption is an impor-
tant strategy to achieve China’s national average fuel economy targets of four liters/100km (or 47
mpg) and 3.2 liters/100km (or 74 mpg) by 2025 and 2030, respectively.
China’s central government initially introduced consumer subsidies in select pilot cities before
2014. By 2014, these initiatives had expanded to 88 cities before a nationwide implementation
in 2016. Consumers pay for the post-subsidy price at the time of purchase and subsidies are dis-
tributed to automakers either quarterly or annually by the government. Table 1 presents the sched-
ules of central subsidies from 2013 to 2018. The subsidies are based on the driving range and
set differently for battery electric vehicles (BEVs) and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs).14
For BEVs, the subsidies are notched with several cutoffs. The minimum range requirement in-
creased from 80km in 2013 to 100km in 2016 and further increased to 150km in 2018, while the
amount of subsidies was reduced over time. For PHEVs, the subsidy was uniform across models
with a minimum range requirement of 50km that remained constant, though the subsidy amount
decreased over time.
It is important to note that the driving range of EVs is not self-reported by the automakers.
Rather, all vehicles undergo rigorous testing by government-designated agencies, with the result-
ing data publicly disclosed by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT). Fur-
thermore, the subsidy schedules were jointly formulated and disseminated by four governmental
bodies: MITT, the Ministry of Finance (MoF),the Ministry of Science and Technology (MoST),
and the National Development and Reform Commission (NRDC). The lead time of policy an-
nouncement varied but it was typically several quarters.15 In these policy contexts, opportunities
13During our sample period, approximately half of the traditional ICE producers also manufactured EVs (including
both BEVs and PHEVs), while 60% to 80% of EV ﬁrms also produced ICEs. For instance, there were 37 Chinese
automobile producers in 2018. Of these, 26 were ICE ﬁrms and 28 specialized in EVs. 17 of these companies were
involved in the production of both ICEs and EVs.
14To incentivize quality improvement, the government tightened the eligibility rules in 2018 by incorporating addi-
tional technical requirements that include the minimum battery density of 105Wh/kg and minimum energy efﬁciency
in kWh/100km as a function of vehicle weight. Consumer subsidies for EVs were phased out by the end of 2022.
15For example, the four government agencies jointly published the draft of the 2016 subsidy policy on April 26,
14


===== [PAGE 17] =====

for automakers to manipulate driving range data or inﬂuence the selection of range cutoffs are
likely minimized. Nevertheless, as we document below, automakers can and do respond to the
changes in subsidy schedules by modifying vehicle attributes.
As shown in Table A1, central subsidies amount to 11-28% of consumer prices for most range
groups. In addition to the central subsidies, many cities provided additional consumer subsidies up
to the amount of central subsidies. In total, central and local subsidies add up to 30-60% of product
prices.16 We collected comprehensive information on both central and local EV subsidies and
control for them in our analysis. In addition to consumer subsidies, cities offer several non-ﬁnancial
incentives: exemption from driving restrictions, exemption from vehicle purchase restrictions, and
green license plate policy. We control for these local policies via city by year by fuel type ﬁxed
effects in our analysis.
3.2
Data and Descriptive Evidence
Data Description
Our analysis is based on three main data sets from 2015 to 2018: (1) annual
vehicle registration data by city and vehicle model for both ICEs and EVs; (2) data on detailed
vehicle attributes by model; and (3) comprehensive central and local ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial
policies. We deﬁne a product by its model name, vehicle type (sedan, SUV, minivan/MPV, and
crossover), fuel type, engine displacement, and driving range (in the case of EVs). Our analysis
focuses on the 40 cities with the largest EV sales in China during the sample period, accounting for
69% of national EV sales. We have panel data with a total of 34,329 observations, covering 497
ICE, 38 PHEV, and 164 BEV products. Appendix B provides details on the sample construction.
In addition, our analysis beneﬁts from multiple auxiliary data sets, including (1) nationally rep-
resentative household surveys on new vehicle buyers from 2015 to 2017 that allow us to construct
micro-moments to identify consumer preference heterogeneity; (2) battery supplier information by
vehicle model, which proves to be powerful supply-side instruments; and (3) all new vehicle mod-
els that the government tested for safety and functionality from August 2014 to December 2018,
including roughly half of the models that were not eventually launched commercially. The last
data set enables us to estimate the engineering relationship between EV driving range and vehicle
attributes; see Section 4.2 below.
We do not observe transaction prices and use MSRPs in our estimation. MSRPs are set by
2014 to solicit public comments. The ﬁnalized 2016 policy was announced on April 29, 2015.
16Only EVs produced by domestic companies or joint ventures are eligible for central subsidies, with imported EVs
excluded. Local subsidies use the same range cutoffs as the central subsidies and are pegged to central subsidies in
most cases.
15


===== [PAGE 18] =====

manufacturers and are the same nationwide for each model-year. Evidence in Appendix B indicates
that price discounts are limited in China due to the practice of “minimum retail price maintenance”
(RPM), whereby automakers either explicitly or implicitly prohibit dealers from selling below a
preset price to reduce price competition among dealers (Barwick et al., 2021).
New vehicle purchases are subjected to four types of taxes: consumption tax from 1% to 40%
depending on engine size, value-added tax at 17%, import tariffs at 25% (if applicable), and sales
tax normally set at 10% but varies with engine size over time during our data period.17 MSRPs
include the consumption tax, value-added tax, and import tariffs, while the sales tax is levied on
MSRP exclusive of the value-added tax. Let ˜P denote the consumer price of a vehicle and P the
producer price:
˜P = MSRP× 1+tValueAdded+tSales
1+tValueAdded
, P = MSRP× 1−tConsumption
1+tValueAdded .
(7)
We use consumer price in demand estimation and producer price in calculating ﬁrm (post-tax)
proﬁts. These tax rates exhibit rich variation and are strong instruments for vehicle prices.
We follow the industry’s convention and deﬁne nine vehicle segments (mini sedan, sub-compact
sedan, compact sedan, mid-size sedan, large sedan, compact SUV, mid-size SUV, large SUV, and
MPV/van). We control for brand ﬁxed effects and segment ﬁxed effects in our demand and supply
analyses. China’s charging station infrastructure has improved signiﬁcantly over time. We use
city-year by fuel type (ICE and EV) ﬁxed effects in all demand speciﬁcations to control for the
time-varying charging network.
Table 2 presents the summary statistics. EVs are, on average, 27% more expensive than gaso-
line vehicles, 15.6 times more fuel efﬁcient (using the EPA’s conversion rate between electricity
and fuel), but are 7% lighter (in vehicle weight net of battery weight) and 13% less powerful in
terms of horsepower.18 The average driving range is 208km with a battery capacity of 29.9kWh.
Descriptive Evidence on Attribute Changes
Figure 4 shows the histogram of driving range on
an annual basis from 2015 to 2018. The dark blue bars represent vehicle models with a driving
range that is just above the subsidy cutoffs. These graphs display two salient features. First, the
distribution of the driving range exhibits pronounced bunching at the cutoffs, likely the result of
the notched subsidy design. Notched schedules generate bunching and could lead to efﬁciency
17An unconventional feature of China’s tax system is that consumption tax is included in the “pre-tax” price and
therefore is in the tax base for other taxes. For example, if the pre-tax price is ¥100k and the consumption tax is 25%,
the manufacturer gets ¥75k while the government collects ¥25k as the consumption tax.
18Throughout the entire analysis, we use ‘net vehicle weight’, which is vehicle weight net of battery weight, as the
measure of vehicle weight.
16


===== [PAGE 19] =====

losses relative to a continuous subsidy schedule, which we study in one of the counterfactual sim-
ulations.19 Second, a noticeable annual shift to the right in the range distribution highlights EV
ﬁrms’ strong responses to policy incentives. For instance, during the period from 2013 to 2015
when the minimum range requirement was 80km, all vehicles in the market had ranges exceeding
80km. In 2016, when the minimum requirement was raised to 100km, accompanied by a substan-
tial jump in subsidies between 100km and 150km, all vehicles in our sample surpassed the 150km
range threshold. Subsequently, in 2018, as the government introduced new cutoffs at 300km and
400km, bunching emerged around these new range limits, a pattern absent in earlier years.
How did automakers manage to enhance their driving ranges in response to policy changes?
The driving range is primarily affected by battery capacity and vehicle weight, both of which can be
adjusted relatively quickly. Figure 5 illustrates the year-to-year changes in vehicle weight (exclud-
ing battery weight) on the x-axis and battery capacity on the y-axis. Blue circles represent models
with increased driving ranges, while red diamonds are models with decreased driving ranges. The
size of the symbol corresponds to the magnitude of the change. Almost all vehicles in our sample
expanded their driving ranges, with some increases exceeding 100km. These enhancements in the
driving range were accompanied by signiﬁcant increases in battery capacity and, quite often, a
reduction in net vehicle weight. Given the evidence presented in this ﬁgure, we focus on ﬁrms’
choices of battery capacity and vehicle weight in the structural model below.
4
Empirical Framework
The empirical framework is an equilibrium model of the automobile sector with both the demand
and supply sides in the spirit of Berry et al. (1995). A key departure of our model is that we
endogenize multiple product attributes on the supply side. As shown in the theoretical model,
ﬁrms’ attribute choices in response to policies affect both environmental externality and quantity
distortion (market power). Allowing endogenous product attributes turns out to be critical for
the welfare analysis across different attribute-based subsidy designs. Throughout the estimation
and counterfactual simulations, we assume ICE attributes are exogenous (prices are endogenous),
both because of limited changes during our sample relative to those for EVs and computational
traceability.
19A large literature has examined policy inefﬁciencies with notches. Notched design in regulations (e.g., standards
or taxes) could lead to compliance test manipulation (Sallee and Slemrod, 2012), tax evasion (Almunia and Lopez-
Rodriguez, 2018), and price discrimination (Houde, 2022, 2018).
17


===== [PAGE 20] =====

4.1
Demand Side
Consumer i chooses from a set of available products J = {0,1,2,...,J} that includes both ICEs
and EVs, where j = 0 represents the outside option of not buying a new vehicle. Let m represent a
market (i.e., city) and t denote time (i.e., year). Consumer i’s utility from vehicle model j ( j ̸= 0)
in market m and year t is speciﬁed as:
ui jmt = −αi( ˜Pjmt −b jmt)+x jmtβi +ξ jmt +εi jmt.
(8)
The utility of the outside option is normalized to zero: ui0mt = 0 for all i, m, and t. Consumer price
of model j in market m at time t, ˜Pjmt, is deﬁned in Equation (7) that accounts for various taxes.
For eligible EVs, the effective price paid by consumers is net of time-varying central and local
subsidies bjmt.
We use an extensive list of demand controls xjmt that consists of three categories. The ﬁrst cat-
egory includes product attributes that are commonly used in this literature, such as vehicle weight,
horsepower, fuel economy and engine size for ICEs and PHEVs, and driving range for PHEVs
and BEVs. The second category is a rich set of ﬁxed effects, including city-by-year-by-fuel type
(ICE or EV) ﬁxed effects to control for time-varying city-level demand shocks for different fuel
types, brand (e.g., BMW) by year-by-fuel type ﬁxed effects to control for demand shocks or brand
awareness over time that could be especially important for the nascent EV technology, segment
(e.g., small sedan) ﬁxed effects, and vintage (the year when a model was launched) ﬁxed effects.
In addition, we collect a comprehensive list of non-ﬁnancial incentives that local governments
use to encourage EV adoption, such as exemption from driving restrictions and vehicle purchase
restrictions, green license plate policies, etc. The literature has shown that these non-ﬁnancial
policies can be effective drivers of EV market penetration (Li et al., 2022). The city-year-fuel type
ﬁxed effects included in our baseline model absorb these local incentives as well as changes in
the charging infrastructure. Finally, ξ jmt represents unobserved attributes of model j or demand
shocks to j in market m at time t, and εi jmt is an idiosyncratic preference shock that is assumed to
have an i.i.d. type I extreme value distribution.
Parameters βi = {βik | k = 1,...,K} represent heterogeneous preference for vehicle attributes.
Preferences for attribute k are deﬁned as βik = ¯βk +σkνik, where ¯βk is the mean preference constant
across all individuals and σkνik stands for individual i’s deviation from the population average.
We assume νik follows a normal distribution and σk captures preferences heterogeneity. The price
coefﬁcient is speciﬁed as αi = exp(α1 +α2log(yim)+σpνip) and depends on consumer i’s income,
yim. We use log-income to moderate the skewness in the income distribution to facilitate the model
18


===== [PAGE 21] =====

ﬁt. The random price coefﬁcient νip is log-normally distributed, and σp captures the dispersion of
the price sensitivity.
As is standard in the literature, we decompose utility ui jmt in Equation (8) into three elements:
1) the mean utility δjmt(θ1) = x jmt ¯β+ξ jmt that is common across all individuals, 2) the consumer-
speciﬁc utility µijmt(θ2) = −αi( ˜Pjmt −b jmt)+∑k σkx jktνikmt, and 3) the idiosyncratic preference
shock εi jmt. Product j’s sales share in market m at time t can be speciﬁed as:
S jmt(θ1,θ2) =
Z
eδjmt(θ1)+µi jmt(θ2)
1+∑k eδkmt(θ1)+µikmt(θ2)dF(µ).
Market shares are computed by aggregating individual choice probabilities. We match these model
predictions to the observed market shares in the estimation in Section 5.
4.2
Supply Side
All automakers, whether producing EVs or ICEs, choose the prices of their products to maximize
total proﬁts. Firms also choose vehicle weight (net of battery weight) and battery capacity for their
EV models to achieve a desired driving range in response to EV subsidies:20
max
{Pj,kj,w j} ∑
j∈Jf
π j(P ,k,w,b)−∑
j∈Jf
FCj(k j,w j)
s. t.
D j(k j,w j) ≥Dc.
Note that k j and w j are battery capacity and net vehicle weight, respectively. The operating proﬁt
from selling product j is the product of per-unit variable proﬁt and total units sold: πj(P ,k,w,b) =
 Pj −mcj(k j,w j)

·Q j( ˜P ,D,w,b).21 The per-unit variable proﬁt depends on the MSRP and taxes
and the marginal cost of production mc j(k j,w j). Aggregate consumer demand Q j is the sum of
demand in each market and depends on post-subsidy prices ˜P −b, driving range D, and vehicle
weight w of all vehicles. The subsidy amount depends on a model’s driving range and the subsidy
schedule: b j = bc ·1{D j ≥Dc}, where Dc is the highest cutoff satisﬁed by model j and bc denotes
the subsidy amount for vehicles whose driving range exceeds Dc. Note that battery capacity k does
not directly enter consumer demand because battery capacity alone does not generate consumer
utility except for its effects on the driving range. Nevertheless, vehicle weight w does enter utility
directly due to consumers’ preference for vehicle safety. Finally, ﬁxed costs FCj(k j,w j) reﬂect
expenses ﬁrms incur when (re)designing product attributes.
20Our model is static so we suppress the time dimension t in the supply analysis for notational simplicity.
21The EV subsidy differs across cities due to differential local subsidies. The discussion here abstracts away from
differences in local subsidy for notation simplicity, but the empirical analysis accounts for it. Consumer price and
producer price are deﬁned in equation (7) that accounts for taxes.
19


===== [PAGE 22] =====

We now discuss the three sets of supply-side model primitives: the technology frontier for the
driving range, the marginal cost function, and the ﬁxed cost function. We assume the technology
frontier that determines the relationship between driving range, battery capacity, and net vehicle
weight is as follows:
D j(k j,w j) = ηkkj +ηww j +κ j.
(9)
The error term κj captures motor efﬁciency, vehicle frame aerodynamics, and factors unrelated
to battery capacity and vehicle weight. To estimate the technology frontier, we utilize data on
all models that have undergone MIIT’s inspection for market entry, including models that were
not eventually launched in the market. This nearly doubles the number of observations as half
of the designed models did not make it to commercial launch. We assume that the technology
frontier is accessible to all ﬁrms.22 The estimation of Equation (9) is performed separately from
the estimation of the marginal and ﬁxed cost parameters.
The marginal cost function is assumed to take the following form:
mc j(k j,w j) = 1{EVj}·ρtγk k j +γw w j +G′
jγg +ω j,
(10)
where 1{EVj} is equal to one if model j is an EV and ρt represents the decline in battery cost
(per kWh) over time. This decline is inﬂuenced by factors such as improvements in production
efﬁciency and battery technology. For example, ρ = 0.9 implies a 10% reduction in the battery
cost each year. The vector Gj includes other vehicle attributes (e.g., horsepower, engine size, and
fuel efﬁciency), as well as fuel type, segment, year, and brand ﬁxed effects. Lastly, ωj captures
unobserved shocks to the marginal cost. The parameters to be estimated are ρ, γk (these two for
EVs only), γw, and γg.
As shown in Figure 5, EV ﬁrms make frequent adjustments to vehicle attributes, especially
battery capacity and vehicle weight. As a result, k j and w j are likely to be correlated with the
marginal cost shocks ωj. For instance, a negative marginal cost shock may lead ﬁrms to reduce
battery and net vehicle weight for cost savings. We explain how to address the endogeneity issue
below in Section 4.3.
Following Fan (2013), we use the following ﬁxed cost speciﬁcation for EV models:
∂FCj
∂k j
= φk +FE +νk
j
and ∂FCj
∂w j
= φw +FE +νw
j ,
where φk and φw capture the slope of the ﬁxed costs for battery capacity and vehicle weight, re-
22We take the technology frontier as given. Barwick et al. (2024) analyzes how government subsidies accelerate the
evolution of the technology frontier through learning by doing.
20


===== [PAGE 23] =====

spectively. As in the marginal cost speciﬁcation, we include segment, year, and brand ﬁxed effects
to capture the variation in the slope of the ﬁxed costs across models (fuel type is irrelevant as we
only estimate the ﬁxed costs for EVs). We allow the ﬁxed cost residuals νk
j and νw
j to be correlated
with battery capacity kj and vehicle weight w j.
Firm f that produces EVs solves a constrained optimization problem by maximizing the fol-
lowing Lagrangian function:
Lf = ∑
j∈Jf
πj(P ,k,w,b)−∑
j∈Jf
FC(k j,w j)+ ∑
j∈Jf
λj[D j(k j,w j)−Dc],
where λj is the shadow value of relaxing the driving range constraint. It varies across vehicle
models and is positive when D j = Dc and zero otherwise.
With the supply side primitives, the ﬁrst-order conditions of prices and attributes are:
FOC for Pj : Qj + ∑
l∈Jf
(Pl −mcl)∂Ql
∂Pj
= 0, ∀j;
(11)
FOC for k j : ∑
l∈Jf
(Pl −mcl)∂Ql
∂k j
= ρtγk
|{z}
∂mc j
∂kj
Q j −
λ j
|{z}
shadow value
ηk
|{z}
∂Dj
∂k j
+φk +FE +νk
j
|
{z
}
∂FCj
∂kj
, ∀j;
(12)
FOC for w j : ∑
l∈Jf
(Pl −mcl)∂Ql
∂wj
= γw
|{z}
∂mc j
∂w j
Qj −
λj
|{z}
shadow value
ηw
|{z}
∂Dj
∂wj
+φw +FE +νw
j
|
{z
}
∂FCj
∂w j
, ∀j.
(13)
The ﬁrst-order condition for prices is standard in the literature and allows researchers to recover the
marginal cost mc j for every product given demand estimates. Once the marginal costs are recov-
ered, we use the marginal cost function (Equation (10)) and the remaining two FOCs (Equations
(12) and (13)) to estimate the supply side parameters jointly.
In addition to endogenous attributes in these equations — battery capacity k j and vehicle weight
w j are correlated with marginal and ﬁxed cost shocks, ωj, νk
j , and νw
j — there is another challenge
that arises from the binding constraints of range subsidies. The Lagrangian multiplier λj, the
shadow value of relaxing the constraint on ﬁrm proﬁt, is product-speciﬁc and unobserved. The
only theoretical constraint on λ j is that it is positive for products whose ranges are at the subsidy
cutoff.23 Assuming νk
j and νw
j are mean independent of exogenous shifters but without further
assumptions, Equations (12) and (13) would lend to inequality conditions in the form of E[λj|Wj] ≥
23Among the 279 EV model-year observations, 41% has a driving range at a cutoff and is associated with λj > 0.
We assume the cutoff is binding if the driving range is equal to or exceeds the cutoff by less than 5km.
21


===== [PAGE 24] =====

0, where Wj are exogenous shifters. We discuss how we address these issues in Section 4.3 below.
4.3
Estimation and Identiﬁcation
Demand Analysis
Our estimation of demand parameters follows the literature (Berry et al.,
1995; Petrin, 2002; Berry et al., 2004) with a key difference: in addition to prices, we also al-
low driving range and vehicle weight to be endogenous. These attributes are adjusted frequently
and likely correlated with the demand shock ξ jm. We use four sets of IVs (9 in total) for these en-
dogenous variables: 1) the central subsidies, 2) sales tax rates, 3) wheelbase, and 4) battery weight
interacted with battery supplier dummies.
The central subsidies are step functions of the driving range, as shown in Table 1, and create a
regression-discontinuity type of variation in vehicle prices. In addition, both the subsidy amount
and the driving range cutoffs change over time, generating rich variation in the sample. Analyzing
demand responses to vehicles with driving ranges slightly below and above the subsidy thresholds
helps identify the price sensitivity. The identiﬁcation assumption is that the variation in prices
induced by the discrete jumps in subsidies provides a plausible source of exogenous variation.24
The central subsidies are also powerful instruments for driving range and vehicle weight, as shown
in Figure 5.
Similarly, the discrete changes in sales tax rates with respect to engine size provide another
source of useful exogenous variation. The sales tax rate is normally set at 10%, but it was lowered
to 5% in 2015 and 2016, and reset to 7.5% in 2017 for vehicles with an engine size of 1.6 liters
or lower. Engine size is included in the utility function. Our identiﬁcation assumption is that the
unobserved product attribute ξ does not change discretely with engine size. Both central subsidies
and sales tax rates are strongly correlated with prices.
The third set of IVs follows the strategy in Whitefoot et al. (2017), which recognizes that
vehicle design is a multi-stage process that could take several years. In particular, the vehicle
frame (and hence wheelbase) is determined in the early stage of the vehicle design. Wheelbase
affects vehicle attributes such as vehicle weight. It also affects battery capacity because battery
packs are stored beneath the ﬂoorboard of vehicles, between the front and rear wheels. We assume
that wheelbase does not enter consumer utility directly because consumers are unlikely to care
about this attribute or know the wheelbase size.
The fourth set of IVs is based on battery weight and battery suppliers. It serves as a set of stan-
24As discussed in Section 3.1, the subsidy schedule was established by the central government and was unlikely to
be inﬂuenced by ﬁrm lobbying. In addition, our rich set of controls and ﬁxed effects alleviate concerns that the subsidy
schedule is correlated with demand shocks ξ.
22


===== [PAGE 25] =====

dard supply-side instruments for demand analysis. These cost-side shifters affect the battery price
and, consequently, the vehicle price. Battery weight and supplier identity also affect the driving
range and vehicle weight but are excluded from consumer utility because they are typically un-
known to consumers. This makes them suitable instruments for driving range and vehicle weight.
We categorize battery suppliers into three groups: BYD, CATL, and others. BYD is the largest
EV maker in China and supplies batteries for its own EV models. CATL is the largest battery
supplier and supply for many EV producers. We include three battery supplier dummies and their
interactions with battery weight, yielding six IVs.
To facilitate the identiﬁcation of heterogeneous consumer preferences, we construct micro-
moments based on a household survey of new vehicle buyers (Petrin, 2002; Berry et al., 2004). We
use the model to ﬁt the observed shares of vehicle buyers by six income groups based on household
annual income (below ¥48k, ¥48-72k, ¥72-96k, ¥96-120k, ¥120-144k, and above ¥144k) by
year for 2015-2017, leading to a total of 15 micro-moments.
The demand estimation is carried out using simulated GMM and a nested contraction mapping
to recover product-speciﬁc mean utility δ jmt. The two sets of moment conditions are:
• Moment condition 1: E[ξ jmt(θ)|Zjmt] = 0, where Z is a vector of exogenous variables for
the demand analysis
• Moment condition 2: Predicted shares = observed shares of vehicle buyers by income group
Supply Analysis
As mentioned in Section 4.2, there are two challenges in taking Equations
(10), (12), and (13) to data to estimate cost parameters. First, vehicle attributes are endogenous.
We leverage three sets of IVs: central subsidies, consumption tax, and sales-weighted average
gasoline price interacting with fuel type. Subsidies affect sales and vehicle attributes, as discussed
above, but are unlikely to be correlated with production cost shocks. The consumption tax rate is
zero for BEVs but has seven different levels in the range of 1-40% for ICEs and PHEVs, depending
on engine size. The consumption tax directly enters producer price as shown in Equation (7) and
likely affects attribute choices such as vehicle weight. The third instrument is the weighted average
of gasoline prices across cities for each model, where the weight is a model’s city-level sales shares.
This variable takes a larger value if the corresponding vehicle model is popular in cities with higher
gasoline prices. High gasoline prices result in high user costs for ICEs and boost demand for EVs.
The identiﬁcation assumption is that gasoline prices, which are heavily regulated in China, are not
affected by cost shocks to EV production.25
25The NRDC sets the ceiling of retail gasoline prices by province based on the moving average price of crude oil on
the international market. Retail prices usually stay close to the ceiling price set by the NRDC (Chen and Sun, 2021).
23


===== [PAGE 26] =====

The second challenge in estimating the supply-side parameters arises because the product-
speciﬁc Lagrangian multiplier λj is unobserved. We propose two solutions. Our ﬁrst solution
follows Moon and Schorfheide (2009) and adds a slackness parameter to Equations (12) and (13)
that captures the population average shadow value conditioning on exogenous shifters E[λ j|Wj].
This converts inequality constraints to equality conditions and allows us to recover cost parameters
via a standard GMM procedure. Our second solution imposes parametric assumptions on λj to
reﬂect the fact that it captures changes in ﬁrm proﬁts when the range constraint tightens by one
unit. If the subsidy threshold increases by 1km, then ﬁrm f could lose up to the incremental
subsidy amount times its sales of product j. In light of this, we assume that the shadow value is
proportional to Q j: λ j ≃ζ ·Q j if λ j > 0, where ζ is a parameter to be estimated.
We estimate the cost parameters (ρ,γ,φ,ζ) jointly with GMM using Equations (10), (12), and
(13), where the cost shocks are assumed to be mean independent of instruments Wj:
E[ωj|Wj] = 0, E[νk
j |Wj] = 0, and E[νw
j |Wj] = 0.
(14)
We use data on both ICEs and EVs for the ﬁrst set of moment conditions on marginal cost shocks
ωj, yielding a total of 1540 model-year observations. The other two sets of moment conditions
on νk
j and νw
j only use data on EVs (as FOCs for attributes are irrelevant for ICEs), with 279
model-year observations
Covariation of prices and vehicle attributes, net of product markups, is informative of the cur-
vature of the variable cost curve. Firms’ choices of battery capacities and vehicle weights at the
model level allow us to learn about the ﬁxed costs of choosing different attributes. For example, if
the driving ranges increase signiﬁcantly when the government increases subsidies for long-range
models, the ﬁxed cost of adding battery capacity cannot be prohibitively high. The parametric
assumptions on the cost structure also help with the supply-side identiﬁcation.
5
Estimation Results
5.1
Demand Estimates
Table 3 presents estimates of the preference parameters in Equation (8). All columns control for
city-by-year-by-fuel type (ICE of EV) ﬁxed effects, brand-by-year-by-fuel type ﬁxed effects, seg-
ment ﬁxed effects, and vintage ﬁxed effects. The ﬁrst column shows results from a simple multino-
mial logit model using OLS. The second column instruments for price, vehicle weight, and driving
range using the four sets of IVs discussed in Section 4.3. As common in the demand literature, the
24


===== [PAGE 27] =====

OLS coefﬁcient estimate on vehicle price is positive (implying an upward-sloping demand curve)
due to the positive correlation between demand shocks (i.e., unobserved product attributes) and
prices. The OLS coefﬁcient estimates on vehicle weight and engine size are also counter-intuitive.
Once we instrument for price and the endogenous attributes, these coefﬁcients are all intuitively
signed, highlighting the importance of controlling for price and attribute endogeneity.
Column (3) reports results from the random coefﬁcient model with heterogeneous preferences.
As in Column (2), all parameter estimates are intuitively signed: consumers prefer heavy vehicles,
EVs with a longer driving range, vehicles with better fuel efﬁciency, and more powerful and larger
engines. High-income households are less price sensitive. In addition, the sizeable and signiﬁcant
σp suggests signiﬁcant heterogeneity in price sensitivity among households with different income
levels. In addition to the price, we allow random coefﬁcients on the constant term, the EV indica-
tor, and the engine displacement. The random coefﬁcient on the constant term captures differences
in the outside option across individuals (used vehicles or public transit) and is large and statisti-
cally signiﬁcant. The random coefﬁcient estimate on the EV dummy is also large and statistically
signiﬁcant, implying a large preference heterogeneity for EV purchases among consumers. The
random coefﬁcients for other vehicle attributes, such as horsepower, fuel economy, and engine size
are insigniﬁcant, partly due to the extensive list of ﬁxed effects.
Figure 6 plots demand elasticities and markups. Given substantial differences between EV
models’ MSRPs and post-subsidy prices, both panels use post-subsidy consumer prices, which
are more appropriate for documenting demand patterns. The left panel depicts the price semi-
elasticities: the percentage change in sales for a ¥1,000 reduction in own prices. The increase in
the percentage of sales is more pronounced for cheaper vehicles, implying more sensitive demand.
Demand for EVs is less price-sensitive than that for ICEs at comparable prices. This is partly due
to the higher income levels of EV buyers and the relatively smaller number of alternatives among
EV models. The implied price elasticities range from -1.74 to -6.50, with an average of -4.15 and
a sales-weighted average of -4.36. These estimates are in line with the literature on ICEs and EVs
(Li et al., 2017a; Li, 2018; Xing et al., 2021; Muehlegger and Rapson, 2022; Springel, 2019). The
right panel in Figure 6 shows markups (i.e., price minus the marginal cost) for all vehicles. High-
end models are more proﬁtable: markups increase with prices. This is an important feature that we
examine in counterfactual simulations below. EVs tend to have higher markups than ICEs, driven
by less intense competition in the EV segment and the pass-through of EV subsidies.
Based on our demand estimates, shutting down central subsidies and allowing ﬁrms to adjust
attributes in response to subsidy removal would reduce EV sales by 70.9% in 2017. The estimated
sales impact is slightly larger than, though broadly in line with that from Li et al. (2022), which
25


===== [PAGE 28] =====

shows that the subsidies attributed to 55% of EVs during the same data period based on a less
ﬂexible demand model and simulations with product attributes ﬁxed. EV subsidies in the U.S. and
Norway generated sales impact of similar magnitude (Li et al., 2017a; Springel, 2019).
5.2
Supply Side Estimates
Technology Frontier
Table 4 presents estimation results for the driving-range technology fron-
tier separately for BEVs and PHEVs because they use different technologies. The ﬁrst two columns
utilize all BEVs and PHEVs (at the trim level) that underwent the driving range test administered
by China’s MIIT. It has nearly twice as many observations as the subset of trims that were com-
mercially launched, which forms the basis of the subsequent analysis on marginal costs and ﬁxed
costs. The last two columns report results using the subset of commercially launched trims. All
regressions include ﬁxed effects for report dates to control for the technology progress over time
as well as potential changes in testing technology and methodology. These two sets of estimates
are nearly identical for BEVs and slightly more precise for PHEVs using the full sample.
The adjusted R2 is 0.9 for BEVs and over 0.7 for PHEVs, suggesting a good model ﬁt. Our
policy analysis below is based on the results from the full sample in Columns (1) and (2). For both
EVs and PHEVs, an additional 1 kWh of battery capacity increases the driving range by about 6
km, aligning with industry consensus. A 10kg increase in net vehicle weight reduces the driving
range by 1.1km for BEVs and about 0.5km for PHEVs (the average EV weighs 1,220kg, exclusive
of batteries). EV batteries’ energy density is a crucial factor that determines how much power a
battery stores, given the weight. Raising the battery density by 1kWh/10kg increases the driving
range by a whopping 27km for BEVs, perhaps not surprising given the average battery density of
1.1kWh/10kg.26
Vehicle weight has a smaller impact on the driving range for PHEVs than BEVs, which is
intuitive because PHEVs are powered by both a battery motor and a gasoline engine. Battery
density has a counter-intuitive sign but is imprecisely estimated for PHEVs, likely due to the small
battery size in PHEVs and the fact that battery capacity rather than density determines the driving
range. As expected, a larger engine size for PHEVs is associated with a longer driving range:
raising the engine displacement by one liter increases its driving range by 5.7km.
26Battery density is at the core of the EV battery technology. Most EV makers, with the notable exception of BYD,
outsourced battery production to battery suppliers during our data period. We assume EV ﬁrms take the battery density
as given when choosing battery capacity and vehicle weight.
26


===== [PAGE 29] =====

Cost Functions
Table 5 reports supply-side parameter estimates from three speciﬁcations. Col-
umn (1) reports the OLS results for the marginal cost Equation (10). Columns (2) and (3) estimate
the marginal and ﬁxed cost parameters simultaneously using GMM as shown in Equation (14).
The difference in Columns (2) and (3) lies in the treatment of the shadow value (i.e., Lagrangian
multiplier) λj in Equations (12) and (13). Column (2) adds a slackness parameter that converts
inequality conditions to equalities following Moon and Schorfheide (2009). Column (3) speciﬁes
the product-speciﬁc shadow values λj as a function of sales. We use Column (3) for counterfactual
analyses that require knowing the shadow value for each vehicle. All estimations include year, fuel
type, segment, and brand ﬁxed effects separately for marginal costs and ﬁxed costs.
We report the parameter estimates for the marginal cost in Panel A and the ﬁxed cost in Panel
B. The slackness parameter and the shadow value parameter are presented in Panel C. Compared
with the results from GMM which addresses the endogeneity of vehicle attributes, OLS estimates
on net vehicle weight and especially battery capacity are biased toward zero, suggesting a negative
correlation between unobserved cost shocks and these attributes. Results in Columns (2) and (3)
are very similar, indicating that cost estimates are robust to how we treat the shadow values. Based
on the results in Column (3), adding 10kg of vehicle weight increases the marginal cost by ¥1,130
for both ICEs and EVs.
Increasing battery capacity by 1kWh in EVs costs ¥3,620 in 2015, the base year. The co-
efﬁcient estimate of ρ, which captures the reduction in battery cost as the technology improves,
is 0.803 and statistically different from 1. In other words, the marginal cost of battery capacity
declined by 19.7% annually and fell to ¥1,874 per kWh by 2018. The nearly 20% annual cost
reduction — likely driven by technological progress, economies of scale, and learning by doing in
the rapidly evolving battery industry — aligns remarkably well with estimates from the literature
(Ziegler and Trancik, 2021) and industry reports.27 Figure 7 plots our estimates of the battery cost
against the battery pack price per kWh from Bloomberg New Energy Finance’s annual battery price
surveys. The pattern of annual reduction in battery prices is very similar between our estimates and
the industry surveys. Bloomberg’s battery pack prices are 28-35% lower than our marginal cost
estimates, which is intuitive because our estimates include not only the cost of purchasing battery
packs but also installation costs.
The estimates of γother in Panel A are similar across columns and have intuitive signs: marginal
costs increase with horsepower, engine size, and fuel efﬁciency. Marginal costs decreased signiﬁ-
cantly over time, reﬂecting both the technological progress and economies of scale as EV produc-
tion ramped up.
27See Bloomberg New Energy Finance report on November 26, 2023 at https://about.bnef.com/blog/lith
ium-ion-battery-pack-prices-hit-record-low-of-139-kwh/.
27


===== [PAGE 30] =====

The estimated parameters in Panel B capture the slope of the ﬁxed cost function with respect
to battery capacity and vehicle weight. The coefﬁcient estimates on battery capacity are large,
positive, and statistically signiﬁcant, implying that the ﬁxed cost of production increases with
battery size. The coefﬁcient estimates for vehicle weight are noisy. Designing larger vehicles can
be more expensive, but the use of lighter materials to reduce weight can also be costly.
The estimated slackness parameter (i.e., the average shadow value E[λ j|Wj] for observations
with a driving range at the cutoffs) in Panel C is large, indicating that relaxing the range cutoffs
could result in signiﬁcant beneﬁts. This is consistent with the shadow value estimate in Column
(3), where an automaker is willing to pay ¥140 per EV to reduce the driving range cutoff by 1km.
Given the average subsidy of ¥100 to ¥390 per km, these estimates indicate that the automakers
are willing to forego a considerable fraction of the subsidies to relax these constraints.
6
Counterfactual Simulations
In this section, we conduct counterfactual simulations to examine the impact of ABS on ﬁrm
choices, consumer demand, and environmental externalities, following the theoretical discussions
in Section 2. We compare ﬁve subsidy designs for BEVs.28 The ﬁrst scenario is a uniform subsidy
that is the same across all EV models. This serves as a benchmark for four attribute-based designs.
The second scenario represents the current notched range-based subsidies. The third scenario im-
plements linear range-based subsidies with a two-part tariff in the form of T +t· driving range,
where T and t are chosen to maximize the social welfare subject to the government’s budget con-
straint. The fourth and ﬁfth scenarios follow the same two-part structure but are based on battery
capacity and vehicle weight, respectively. Appendix C.3 provides details and a discussion of the
simulation algorithm.29
Throughout the counterfactual analyses, we hold attributes for ICE models ﬁxed. This simpli-
ﬁcation is driven by two considerations. First, the market share of EVs was less than 3% before
2017 and 5.5% in 2018. EV subsidies likely had a limited impact on the attributes of ICEs. Sec-
ond, solving for the new market equilibrium is computationally intensive with a larger number
of multiple-product ﬁrms. Endogenizing attribute choices for ICEs would make the optimization
more demanding due to the presence of many ICE models. Our simulations are based on the 2017
28We maintain the existing subsidy rate for PHEVs (see Table 1), but allow their attributes to change in response to
different subsidy designs for BEVs.
29The counterfactual analyses are computationally intensive. Searching for the optimal choices of T and t for each
subsidy design requires evaluating many guesses of T and t. For each guess, we need to solve the entire industry equi-
librium with hundreds of vehicle prices for both ICEs and EVs and endogenous attributes for both BEVs and PHEVs.
We provide analytical gradients for the Newton–Raphson algorithm that greatly speeds up the solution process.
28


===== [PAGE 31] =====

cohort, though results are qualitatively similar with other cohorts. To facilitate comparison, we
ﬁxed the total subsidy amount from the central government at ¥6.33 billion as under the observed
policy in 2017 throughout all counterfactual simulations.30
Social welfare is the sum of consumer surplus and ﬁrm proﬁts minus the cost of emissions.
The environmental beneﬁt for an EV model is calculated as the monetized savings from emission
reductions (including CO2 and local pollutants PM, SO2, and NOx) relative to alternative ICEs that
the EV replaces, following the literature (Holland et al., 2016; Xing et al., 2021). The calculation
crucially considers the following: 1) substitution patterns between EVs and ICEs, based on our
demand estimates; 2) tailpipe emissions standards and average fuel economy of ICEs that an EV
replaces, 3) the energy efﬁciency of an EV model in kWh/km, calculated as the ratio of battery
capacity over driving range; 4) the emission intensity of thermal power generation and the share
of thermal power generation in the province where an EV is sold; and 5) the monetized marginal
health damages of different pollutants. See Appendix C.1 for more details.
We additionally evaluate accident externalities in robustness analyses. Accident externalities
from trafﬁc safety vary under different policy scenarios due to changes in vehicle weight. Heavier
vehicles are shown to impose larger accident externalities (Li, 2012; Anderson and Auffhammer,
2014; Bento et al., 2017). Appendix C.2 presents details on the calculation of accident externalities.
They are approximately half the magnitude of environmental externalities and do not change the
welfare results qualitatively.
6.1
Optimal Subsidy Rates
We report the optimal ABS policy design in the form of T +t ·z in Table A3. To illustrate how we
solve for these optimal designs, Figure A4 depicts the equilibrium consumer surplus, ﬁrm proﬁt,
and emissions as we vary the subsidy intensity t for each of the three ABS designs. The base
subsidy T is determined by the budget constraint. As the subsidy intensity t rises, ﬁrms respond
by producing EVs with extended driving ranges, increased battery capacity, and greater vehicle
weights. Initially, this boosts consumer surplus. However, as t continues to increase, consumer
surplus begins to decline for two reasons. First, marginal and ﬁxed costs of production increase
in vehicle attributes, leading to higher consumer prices. Second, the marginal utility derived from
these attributes diminishes. Consequently, consumer surplus is concave in t.
The environmental beneﬁt from the emission reduction diminishes as the subsidy intensity t
increases across all three ABS designs. This is driven by two mechanisms. First, ABS offers
30This is the total central subsidy that was distributed to the 40 cities in our sample. We ﬁx local subsidy designs at
the observed level.
29


===== [PAGE 32] =====

greater incentives for vehicles with enhanced attributes and changes the composition of vehicle
sales in favor of larger and heavier models. This sales channel results in a ﬂeet that is less fuel
efﬁcient on average. Second, a higher subsidy intensity t encourages the provision of the targeted
attribute for a given vehicle. Capacity- and weight-based subsidies lead to larger battery capacities
and vehicle weights, which reduce fuel efﬁciency and diminish environmental beneﬁts. While a
higher subsidy intensity under the range-based subsidy prompts the downsizing of vehicles and
improves environmental performance for a given vehicle, this effect is dominated by changes in
the composition of EV sales (the sales channel).
Firms’ proﬁts from selling BEVs are moderately concave in subsidy intensity t for range- and
capacity-based subsidies and close to ﬂat for weight-based subsidies. This is partly because higher
subsidies are offset by the increases in the costs of offering these attributes. Altogether, the social
welfare is concave in t, with a well-deﬁned optimal subsidy intensity t∗and the corresponding T ∗.
6.2
Notched vs. Linear Subsidies
We ﬁrst compare equilibrium outcomes under the observed notched subsidy to the linear subsidy.
Under the notched design, the range cutoffs are 100km, 150km, and 250km, and the corresponding
subsidy levels are ¥20k, ¥36k, and ¥44k, respectively, as shown in Table 1. Under the linear
design, the per-unit subsidy is ¥24,704 + ¥70 × driving range, which gives ¥31.7k, ¥35.2k, and
¥42.2k for vehicles with a driving range of 100km, 150km, and 250km, respectively.
Figure 8 plots the distribution of the BEV driving range under the notched design in red and
the linear design in blue. The contrast between the two distributions is stark: while there is strong
bunching with the notched subsidy design, bunching disappears with the linear subsidy design. As
documented by Sallee and Slemrod (2012) in the context of fuel economy standards, there are two
inefﬁciencies associated with a notched policy. First, there might be excessive bunching whereby
ﬁrms alter weight and battery capacity to reach the driving range cutoffs. Second, ﬁrms have no
incentive to improve attributes incrementally between the cutoffs.
Table A4 tabulates changes in vehicle attributes, prices, marginal costs, and sales separately
for BEVs with driving ranges at the subsidy cutoffs and for those with driving ranges away from
the cutoffs. Transitioning from notched to linear subsidies prompts automakers to adjust the char-
acteristics of individual vehicles, depending on whether the cutoffs are binding or not. Models at
the cutoffs experience increases in net vehicle weight and decreases in battery capacity, resulting
in reduced driving ranges. MSRPs, marginal costs, and subsidies all decline. Conversely, vehicles
with driving range away from the cutoffs witness increases in battery capacity and reductions in
vehicle weight as ﬁrms respond to the stronger incentive to provide range under the linear policy.
30


===== [PAGE 33] =====

These disparate responses underscore the distortions inherent to the notched policy.
Sales for BEV models with the longest driving ranges increase while sales for the other groups
drop, because the former group has more desirable attributes and receives much larger subsidies
under the linear design. Lastly, social welfare improves by ¥135 million annually, as shown in
Table 6 below.
6.3
Welfare Analysis
We ﬁrst discuss differences in vehicle attributes under different ABS designs, then examine welfare
implications, and ﬁnish with a welfare decomposition exercise that highlights underlying channels.
Changes in Vehicle Attributes
Figure 9 illustrates the average vehicle price, battery capacity,
net vehicle weight, and driving range under the uniform subsidy and the four ABS designs: the
current notched range-based subsidy and linear subsidy designs based on driving range, battery
capacity, and vehicle weight.
Vehicle prices are higher under all ABS designs than under the uniform subsidy. This is due
to the increased provision of vehicle attributes that consumers desire. The capacity subsidy results
in the largest price increase of 6.3%. The increase in prices reﬂects the fact that capacity-based
subsidies prompt ﬁrms to increase the provision of battery capacity, vehicle weight, and driving
range the most relative to all other designs.
Panels (b)-(d) exhibit an intuitive pattern: ﬁrms increase the vehicle attribute that is targeted
by the policy. For example, battery capacity is the highest under capacity-based subsidy compared
to all other designs. Vehicle weight is the largest and driving range is the lowest under weight-
based subsidy, highlighting the trade-off between vehicle weight and driving range. Range-based
subsidies incentivize ﬁrms to increase battery capacity while reducing vehicle weight, leading to
the longest driving range but the lowest vehicle weight.
Changes in Markups
A key theoretical insight of Section 2 is that ABS designs can also effec-
tively mitigate market power and quantity distortions. To illustrate this, Figure 10 plots changes in
markups Pj(x)−Cj(x) for products in each quartile of the price distribution when we move from
the uniform subsidy to ABS designs. Each of the four panels depicts changes for one of the four
ABS designs. A consistent pattern emerges across all panels: markups decrease for products above
the median price and they increase for products below the median price. Notably, the reduction in
markups for products above the median price is most pronounced under capacity-based subsidy.
Given that high markups are typically associated with quantity distortions, and such distortions are
31


===== [PAGE 34] =====

more pronounced among higher-priced products, capacity-based subsidy appears most effective at
addressing quantity distortions among all policies we examine.
Changes in Sales
Table A5 reports changes in sales for BEVs with different qualities when we
move from the uniform subsidy to ABS. We divide the BEVs into high-quality models (where
the WTP is above the median of ¥130k) and low-quality models (WTP below ¥130k) using con-
sumer WTP under the uniform policy.31 The uniform subsidy favors low-quality models com-
pared to ABS. High-quality models receive more subsidies under ABS, especially with weight-
and especially capacity-based subsidies. The sales impact under different designs is an important
underlying channel for the welfare comparison we discuss below.
Welfare Comparison
Table 6 presents changes in welfare under different ABS designs relative
to the uniform subsidy, where welfare is consumer surplus plus ﬁrm proﬁt net of the monetized
cost of emissions. We use the uniform subsidy as the baseline because it does not directly target
product attributes. All cells report changes when we move from the uniform subsidy to ABS.
There are several key ﬁndings from this table. First, all ABS designs generate signiﬁcant
gains in consumer surplus relative to the uniform subsidy, ranging from ¥226 million in 2017
under the notched design to ¥643 and ¥680 million under capacity- and weight-based subsidies,
respectively. These consumer gains arise from two channels. First, ABS subsidies induce more
desirable vehicle attributes, as shown in Figure 9. Second, ABS designs more effectively address
quantity distortions that arise from market power and high mark-ups, as demonstrated in Figure 10.
The increase in consumer surplus is relatively modest for range-based designs because it leads to
vehicle downsizing, which is undesirable to consumers.
Firms producing BEVs beneﬁt from the ABS designs that redistribute subsidies from the low-
end models to the high-end ones. Sales of high-end products increase signiﬁcantly relative to
the uniform subsidy (see Table A5). These vehicles are more proﬁtable and boost the proﬁts of
BEVs.32 Compared to gains in consumer surplus, however, proﬁt increases from selling EVs are
about an order of magnitude smaller and slightly negative for the notched design. The increase in
BEV proﬁts is mostly offset by losses in ICE proﬁts. In general, automakers collectively suffer a
net loss under ABS relative to the uniform subsidy.
31The average WTP for each model is simulated using 150 pseudo consumers in each market and 10,000 idiosyn-
cratic preference shocks for each pseudo consumer, εi jm. It is deﬁned as the payment level that makes consumers
indifferent between buying and not buying the vehicle.
32The proﬁt gains of BEVs is much lower at ¥5.4 million under the weight-based subsidy because increasing
vehicle weight is costly. Both the marginal and ﬁxed costs of production increase signiﬁcantly with heavier vehicles.
32


===== [PAGE 35] =====

The environmental performance of the EV ﬂeet worsens as sales shift to larger and less environ-
mentally friendly EVs under ABS. Compared to the uniform subsidy, the social cost of emissions
increases by ¥70 million under the notched range subsidy to ¥182 million under the weight sub-
sidy. The environmental performance under the weight-based design is the most compromised
due to the EVs becoming heavier. As a robustness check, Table A6 reports changes in accident
externalities, which are about half of the welfare cost of the increased emissions. Perhaps not
surprisingly, weight-based subsidies lead to the largest increase in accident externality due to the
larger vehicle weight.
In total, ABS designs result in signiﬁcant welfare gains compared to the uniform subsidy,
ranging from ¥97.2 million under the current notched range subsidy to ¥448 million under the
capacity subsidy. These gains stem from consumer beneﬁts outweighing the losses in automakers’
proﬁts and the social costs associated with increased emissions.
Second, the capacity-based subsidy design — the policy implemented in the U.S. — yields the
largest welfare gain. This design strikes the best balance between moderating negative environ-
mental externalities and mitigating quantity distortions as a result of market power. This is because
the variation in market power across products has a higher correlation with battery capacity than it
does with other attributes. As a result, capacity-based subsidies can more effectively correct quan-
tity (i.e., market power) distortion than other designs as outlined in Section 2.2 and illustrated in
Figure 10. In addition, capacity-based subsidies incentivize ﬁrms to produce high-quality vehicles,
further boosting consumer surplus.
Third, the uniform subsidy design that is adopted in several European countries turns out to
be less efﬁcient than ABS as a result of two countervailing forces. On the one hand, the uniform
subsidy increases the market share of smaller vehicles due to the relatively higher subsidies for
these vehicles and achieves the best environmental outcome. On the other hand, the uniform
subsidy does not provide incentives for quality provision, and ﬁrms produce vehicles with smaller
batteries and lower weight (see Figure 9). Overall, the environmental beneﬁt is outweighed by a
much higher expense of consumer surplus due to the lower consumer WTP for smaller and low-
quality vehicles.
Welfare Decomposition
ABS designs could improve welfare through several channels: they
mitigate market power and redistribute subsidies toward products with more severe distortions. If
quality under-provision is relevant, ABS also incentivizes attribute provision. These channels are
intertwined in the welfare analyses above. We perform a decomposition exercise to disentangle
them and further understand the role of each of the channels.
33


===== [PAGE 36] =====

Let Y o = (Xo,P o,Qo,Ro) denote the equilibrium outcomes under the uniform subsidy: vec-
tors of vehicle attributes, prices, quantities, and total subsidies for each product under the uniform
policy. The total subsidy for a given product is the per-unit subsidy times quantity: R j = bj · Qj.
Let Y ′ = (X′,P ′,Q′,R′) denote equilibrium outcomes under an ABS alternative. We decompose
the welfare changes, ∆SW = SW(Y ′)−SW(Y o), into the following two components:
∆SW = SW(X′,P ′,Q′,R′)−SW(Xo,P o,Qo,Ro)
= SW(X′,P ′,Q′,R′)−SW(X′, e
P , e
Q,Ro)
|
{z
}
Beneﬁts from Mitigating Market Power
+SW(X′, e
P , e
Q,Ro)−SW(Xo,P o,Qo,Ro)
|
{z
}
Beneﬁts from Improved Attributes
,
where (X′, e
P , e
Q,Ro) refers to the scenario that ﬁxes subsidy expenditures across products at Ro,
but adjusts attributes to X′ and allows ﬁrms to choose prices e
P (which pins down quantities e
Q) to
maximize proﬁt given X′ and Ro.
In the ﬁrst channel, which is labeled ‘Beneﬁts from Mitigating Market Power,’ products receive
different subsidies according to the ABS design while attributes are ﬁxed at X′. Vehicles equipped
with better attributes beneﬁt from higher subsidies, which lowers the post-subsidy markups. The
only difference between SW(X′,P ′,Q′,R′) and SW(X′, e
P , e
Q,Ro) arises from subsidy levels
across products (and the associated price responses) which allows us to measure the effectiveness
of ABS subsidies in mitigating market power distortions. In the second channel, which is labeled
‘Beneﬁts from Improved Attributes,’ the subsidies across products are ﬁxed at Ro while product
attributes change. This isolates the welfare effect of attribute changes separate from changes in
the level of subsidies across products as a result of ABS. As pointed out in Section 2.1, while our
theoretical setup rules out the Spence distortion, the presence of such a distortion serves as another
rationale for ABS designs.
In addition to the decomposition exercise, we conduct another counterfactual simulation that is
motivated by Section 2.3, where we allocate subsidies across products in the form of Tj +t ∗z(Xj)
with a product-speciﬁc base subsidy Tj. This enables the government to redistribute subsidies more
effectively across products with varying degrees of market failures.33 We call this the ‘Subsidy
Redistribution Channel.’ Denote these outcomes as ˆY = (X′, ˆ
P , ˆ
Q, ˆ
R), where ˆ
R = ˆb· ˆ
Q and ˆb is
the vector of product-speciﬁc optimal subsidies and ˆ
P ( ˆ
Q) stands for the optimal prices (quantities)
given ˆb. The magnitude of welfare changes ∆SW = SW( ˆY ) −SW(Y ′) speaks to the importance
of subsidy redistribution.
Table 7 reports the welfare results. Columns (1) to (3) in Panel A show that changes in at-
33ABS designs in the form of T +t ∗z(Xj) also redistribute subsidies across products, though the extent of redistri-
bution is somewhat limited.
34


===== [PAGE 37] =====

tributes account for 42-62% of total welfare gains. These results echo the importance of endog-
enizing product attributes in evaluating ABS. Columns (4) to (6) in Panel A illustrate that ABS
designs effectively address market power distortions, which explains the remaining 38% to 58%
of the welfare gains. The capacity- and weight-based designs allocate larger subsidies to products
with more severe market power (and quantity) distortions, resulting in a larger boost to consumer
surplus. However, the gains are partially offset by increased emissions. Overall, all ABS designs
lead to signiﬁcant welfare gains relative to uniform subsidies.
Allowing subsidy redistribution in the form of Tj + t ∗z(Xj) further improves welfare. The
magnitude of the welfare gains is comparable to the gains associated with reducing market power,
from ¥143 million for range policy to ¥190 million for weight policy, enhancing welfare gains
by another 34% to 62% (Panel B of Table 7). A third of these additional welfare gains can be
attributed to increases in ﬁrm proﬁts, with the remainder explained by improvements in consumer
surplus and a moderate decline in environmental beneﬁts.
Endogenous Attributes
Finally, to shed light on the importance of endogenizing product at-
tributes, we conduct simulations holding product attributes ﬁxed and only allowing prices and
sales to adjust, as commonly done in the literature. The results are in Table A7. While the sign of
the total welfare changes is the same as the baseline results in Table 6, the magnitude of the impact
is only 28% of the baseline results for capacity and weight subsidies and 40% for range subsidies.
In addition, ﬁxing product attributes leads to the spurious conclusion that ABS designs increase
ﬁrm proﬁts, contrary to the results shown in Table 6 with endogenous attributes.
7
Conclusion
Attribute-based subsidies (ABS) are commonly used to promote the diffusion of energy efﬁcient
products. These products are often manufactured by ﬁrms with market power. To the best of our
knowledge, this study offers the ﬁrst theoretical and empirical analysis of how ABS affects product
attributes, consumer demand, and environmental externalities in a differentiated product oligopoly.
Our theoretical model traces out the locus of optimal EV subsidy design with a two-part subsidy
structure under varying government budget constraints, highlighting the importance of balancing
environmental externalities and market power distortions in policy design. The empirical analysis
uses China’s passenger vehicle market to evaluate the impact of ABS. Counterfactual simulations
indicate that, although the uniform EV subsidy generates the largest emission reductions, ABS
generates signiﬁcant gains in overall welfare relative to the uniform subsidy. It does so by incen-
35


===== [PAGE 38] =====

tivizing quality provision and alleviating quantity distortions. Battery capacity subsidies generate
the largest increase in social welfare relative to uniform subsidies and other ABS designs because
they most effectively balance quantity distortions and environmental impacts. The analysis also
underscores the importance of including endogenous product attributes when evaluating the wel-
fare impacts of ABS. Our framework takes product offerings as given and does not consider the
effect of government subsidies on technological innovations, which we leave for future research.
References
Allcott, Hunt and Cass R. Sunstein, “Regulating Internalities,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 2015, 34 (3), 698–705.
and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Evaluating Behaviorally Motivated Policy: Experimental Evidence
from the Lightbulb Market,” American Economic Review, August 2015, 105 (8), 2501–38.
Almunia, Miguel and David Lopez-Rodriguez, “Under the radar: The effects of monitoring
ﬁrms on tax compliance,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2018, 10 (1), 1–38.
Anderson, Michael L. and Maximilian Auffhammer, “Pounds That Kill: The External Costs of
Vehicle Weight,” Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81, 535–571.
Anderson, Soren T, Ian WH Parry, James M Sallee, and Carolyn Fischer, “Automobile fuel
economy standards: Impacts, efﬁciency, and alternatives,” Review of Environmental Economics
and Policy, 2011, 5 (1), 89–108.
Bai, Jie, Panle Barwick, Shengmao Cao, and Shanjun Li, “Quid Pro Quo, Knowledge Spillover
and Industrial Quality Upgrading,” 2020. Working Paper.
Barahona, Nano, Cristóbal Otero, and Sebastián Otero, “Equilibrium Effects of Food Labeling
Policies,” Econometrica, 2023, 91 (3), 839–868.
Barnett, A. H., “The Pigouvian Tax Rule Under Monopoly,” The American Economic Review,
1980, 70 (5), 1037–1041.
Barwick, Panle J., Hyuksoo Kwon, Shanjun Li, and Nahim Zahur, “Drive Down the Cost:
Learning by Doing and Government Policy in the Global Electric Vehicle Battery Industry,”
2024.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Shengmao Cao, and Shanjun Li, “Local Protectionism, Market Structure,
and Social Welfare: China’s Automobile Market,” American Economic Journal: Economic Pol-
icy, 2021, 13 (4), 112–51.
36


===== [PAGE 39] =====

Bento, Antonio, Kenneth Gillingham, and Kevin Roth, “The Effect of Fuel Economy Standards
on Vehicle Wight Dispersion and Accident Fatalities,” 2017. Working Paper.
Beresteanu, Arie and Shanjun Li, “Gasoline Prices, Government Support, and the Demand for
Hybrid Vehicles,” International Economic Review, 2011, 52 (1), 161–182.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (2004), “Differentiated Products Demand Systems from a
Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The New Car Market,” Journal of Political Economy,
2004, pp. 68–105.
Berry, Steven T., James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, “Automobile Prices in Market Equilib-
rium,” Econometrica, 1995, 63 (4), 841–890.
Boomhower, Judson and Lucas W. Davis, “A Credible Approach for Measuring Inframarginal
Participation in Energy Efﬁciency Programs,” Journal of Public Economics, 2014, 113, 67–79.
Bovenberg, A. Lans and Lawrence H. Goulder, “Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Pres-
ence of Other Taxes: General- Equilibrium Analyses,” The American Economic Review, 1996,
86 (4), 985–1000.
Buchanan, James M., “External Diseconomies, Corrective Taxes, and Market Structure,” The
American Economic Review, 1969, 59 (1), 174–177.
Chade, Hector and Jeroen Swinkels, “Screening in Vertical Oligopolies,” Econometrica, 2021,
89 (3), 1265–1311.
Chen, Hao and Zesheng Sun, “International crude oil price, regulation and asymmetric response
of China’s gasoline price,” Energy Economics, 2021, 94, 105049.
Crawford, Gregory S, Oleksandr Shcherbakov, and Matthew Shum, “Quality overprovision
in cable television markets,” American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (3), 956–95.
Davis, Lucas W, “The effect of driving restrictions on air quality in Mexico City,” Journal of
Political Economy, 2008, 116 (1), 38–81.
Fan, Ying, “Ownership consolidation and product characteristics: A study of the US daily news-
paper market,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1598–1628.
and Chenyu Yang, “Competition, product proliferation and welfare: A study of the us smart-
phone market,” Available at SSRN 2506423, 2016.
Fowlie, Meredith, Mar Reguant, and Stephen P Ryan, “Market-based emissions regulation and
industry dynamics,” Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (1), 249–302.
37


===== [PAGE 40] =====

Gillingham, Kenneth and Tsvetan Tsvetanov, “Hurdles and steps: Estimating demand for solar
photovoltaics,” Quantitative Economics, 2019, 10 (1), 275–310.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Ian W. H. Parry, and Dallas Burtraw, “Revenue-Raising versus Other
Approaches to Environmental Protection: The Critical Signiﬁcance of Preexisting Tax Distor-
tions,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 1997, 28 (4), 708–731.
Holland, Stephen P., Erin T. Mansur, and Nicholas Z. Muller, “Are There Environmental Ben-
eﬁts from Driving Electric Vehicles? The Importance of Local Factors,” American Economic
Review, 2016, 106 (12), 3700–3729.
Houde, Sébastien, “The incidence of coarse certiﬁcation: Evidence from the ENERGY STAR
Program,” 2018. Working Paper.
, “Bunching with the stars: How ﬁrms respond to environmental certiﬁcation,” Management
Science, 2022, 68 (8), 5569–5590.
and Joseph E. Aldy, “Consumers’ Response to State Energy Efﬁcient Appliance Rebate Pro-
grams,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, November 2017, 9 (4), 227–55.
Huo, Hong, Qiang Zhang, Fei Liu, and Kebin He, “Climate and environmental effects of electric
vehicles versus compressed natural gas vehicles in China: a life-cycle analysis at provincial
level,” Environmental science & technology, 2013, 47 (3), 1711–1718.
IEA,
“Global
EV
Outlook
2022,”
Technical
Report,
IEA,
Paris
2022.
https://www.iea.org/reports/global-ev-outlook-2022.
Ito, Koichiro and James M Sallee, “The economics of attribute-based regulation: Theory and
evidence from fuel economy standards,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2018, 100 (2),
319–336.
Jacobsen, Mark R., Christopher R. Knittel, James M. Sallee, and Arthur A. van Benthem,
“The Use of Regression Statistics to Analyze Imperfect Pricing Policies,” Journal of Political
Economy, 2020, 128 (5), 1826–1876.
Jerch, Rhiannon, Panle Jia Barwick, Shanjun Li, and Jing Wu, “The Impact of Road Rationing
on Housing Demand and Sorting,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2023. forthcoming.
Kellogg, Ryan, “Gasoline price uncertainty and the design of fuel economy standards,” Journal of
Public Economics, 2018, 160, 14–32.
, “Output and attribute-based carbon regulation under uncertainty,” Journal of Public Economics,
2020, 190, 104246.
38


===== [PAGE 41] =====

Kiso, Takahiko, “A Subsidy That Is Inversely Related to the Product Price,” Economic Journal,
2021. forthcoming.
Klier, Thomas and Joshua Linn, “New-vehicle characteristics and the cost of the Corporate
Average Fuel Economy standard,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 2012, 43 (1), 186–213.
and
, “The effect of vehicle fuel economy standards on technology adoption,” Journal of
Public Economics, 2016, 133, 41–63.
Knittel, Christopher R, “Automobiles on steroids: Product attribute trade-offs and technological
progress in the automobile sector,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3368–99.
Kwon, Hyuk-soo, “Subsidies versus Tradable Credits for Electric Vehicles: The Role of Market
Power in the Credit Market,” 2023. Working Paper.
Langer, Ashley and Derek Lemoine, “Designing dynamic subsidies to spur adoption of new
technologies,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.
Leard, Benjamin, Joshua Linn, and Yichen Christy Zhou, “How Much Do Consumers Value
Fuel Economy and Performance? Evidence from Technology Adoption,” The Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics, 01 2023, 105 (1), 158–174.
Li, Shanjun, “Trafﬁc Safety and Vehicle Choice: Quantifying the Effects of the ‘Arms Race’ on
American Roads,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2012, 27, 34–62.
, “Better lucky than rich? Welfare analysis of automobile license allocations in Beijing and
Shanghai,” Review of Economic Studies, 2018, 85 (4), 2389–2428.
, Lang Tong, Jianwei Xing, and Yiyi Zhou, “The Market for Electric Vehicles: Indirect Net-
work Effects and Policy Impacts,” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resources
Economists, 2017, 4 (1), 89–133.
, Xianglei Zhu, Yiding Ma, Fan Zhang, and Hui Zhou, “The Role of Government in the Mar-
ket for Electric Vehicles: Evidence from China,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
2022, 41 (2), 450–485.
Li, Xin, Konstantinos J Chalvatzis, and Dimitrios Pappas, “China’s electricity emission inten-
sity in 2020–an analysis at provincial level,” Energy Procedia, 2017, 142, 2779–2785.
Moon, Hyungsik Roger and Frank Schorfheide, “Estimation with overidentifying inequality
moment conditions,” Journal of Econometrics, 2009, 153 (2), 136–154.
Muehlegger, Erich and David S. Rapson, “Subsidizing low- and middle-income adoption of
39


===== [PAGE 42] =====

electric vehicles: Quasi-experimental evidence from California,” Journal of Public Economics,
2022, 216, 104752.
Narain, Urvashi and Chris Sall, Methodology for Valuing the Health Impacts of Air Pollution:
Discussion of Challenges and Proposed Solutions, The World Bank, 2016.
Parry, Ian WH, Mr Dirk Heine, Eliza Lis, and Shanjun Li, Getting energy prices right: From
principle to practice, International Monetary Fund, 2014.
Petrin, Amil, “Quantifying the beneﬁt of new products: the case of minivan,” Journal of Political
Economy, 2002, 110 (4), 705–729.
Pless, Jacquelyn and Arthur A. van Benthem, “Pass-Through as a Test for Market Power: An
Application to Solar Subsidies,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, October
2019, 11 (4), 367–401.
Remmy, Kevin, “Adjustable product attributes, indirect network effects, and subsidy design: The
case of electric vehicles,” 2022. Working Paper.
Reynaert, Mathias, “Abatement strategies and the cost of environmental regulation: Emission
standards on the European car market,” Review of Economic Studies, 2021, 88, 454–488.
Sallee, James, “The Surprising Incidence of Tax Credits for the Toyota Prius,” American Eco-
nomics Journal: Economics Policy, 2011, 3, 189–219.
Sallee, James M and Joel Slemrod, “Car notches: Strategic automaker responses to fuel economy
policy,” Journal of Public Economics, 2012, 96 (11-12), 981–999.
Sills, Jennifer, Helai Huang, Fangrong Chang, David C. Schwebel, Peishan Ning, Peixia
Cheng, and Guoqing Hu, “Improve trafﬁc death statistics in China,” Science, 2018, 362 (6415),
650–650.
Spence, A. Michael, “Monopoly, Quality, and Regulation,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 1975,
6 (2), 417–429.
Springel, Katalin, “Network Externality and Subsidy Structure in Two-Sided Markets: Evidence
from Electric Vehicle Incentives,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2019, 13 (4),
393–432.
Stavins, Robert N., “Vintage-Differentiated Environmental Regulation,” Stanford Environmental
Law Journal, 2006, pp. 29–63.
Tang, Ling, Xiaoda Xue, Jiabao Qu, Zhifu Mi, Xin Bo, Xiangyu Chang, Shouyang Wang,
40


===== [PAGE 43] =====

Shibei Li, Weigeng Cui, and Guangxia Dong, “Air pollution emissions from Chinese power
plants based on the continuous emission monitoring systems network,” Scientiﬁc Data, 2020, 7
(320), 2052–4463.
Wang, Jingyuan and Jianwei Xing, “Subsidizing Industry Growth in a Market with Lemons:
Evidence from the Chinese Electric Vehicle Market,” 2023. Working Paper.
Whitefoot, Kate, Meredith Fowlie, and Steven J. Skerlos, “Compliance by Design: Inﬂuence
of Acceleration Trade-offs on CO2 Emissions and Costs of Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas
Regulations,” Environmental Science & Technology, 2017, (18), 10307–10315.
Wollmann, Thomas G, “Trucks without bailouts: Equilibrium product characteristics for com-
mercial vehicles,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (6), 1364–1406.
Xing, Jianwei, Benjamin Leard, and Shanjun Li, “What Does an Electric Vehicle Replace?,”
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2021, 107, 102432.
Ziegler, Micah S. and Jessica E. Trancik, “Re-examining rates of lithium-ion battery technology
improvement and cost decline,” Energy & Environmental Science, 2021, 14, 1635–1651.
41


===== [PAGE 44] =====

Figures & Tables
Figure 1: Attribute Choices and Social Welfare under Monopoly
(a) Attribute Space
x1
x2
x∗
Iso-social-surplus:
B(x)−C(x)+φ ·e(x)
xo
Iso-private-surplus:
B(x)−C(x)
(b) Product Market with xo
DWL1
C(xo)
P∗(xo)
C(xo)−φ ·e(xo)
Pm(xo)
Qm(xo)
Q∗(xo)
Q
 P−B(xo)

P
Q
(c) Impact of Attribute Change
Q
 B(P−B(xo)

C(x∗)
C(xo)
C(xo)−φ ·e(xo)
P∗(xo)
P∗(x∗)
C(x∗)−φ ·e(x∗)
Q∗(x∗)
Q∗(xo)
Q
 P−B(x∗)

P
Q
(d) Product Market with x∗
DWL2 =
-
Q
 P−B(xo)

C(x∗)
C(xo)
C(xo)−φ ·e(xo)
P∗(x∗)
C(x∗)−φ ·e(x∗)
Pm(xo)
Qm(xo)
Q∗(xo)
Q∗(x∗)
Q
 P−B(x∗)

P
Q
Notes: Panel (a) depicts the attribute space where the contour lines represent the iso-quant curves for the private
surplus B(x) −C(x) and social surplus B(x) −C(x) + φ · e(x). The monopolist chooses xo and the social planner
picks x∗. Panel (b) illustrates the product market outcomes conditioning on product design xo. Pm(xo) and Qm(xo)
are the price and quantity chosen by the monopolist while the socially optimal price and quantity are P∗(xo) and
Q∗(xo). The red triangle DWL1 is the deadweight loss due to market power when the attributes are chosen at xo.
Panel (c) depicts the impact of attribute change from xo to x∗. xo maximizes the private surplus B(x) −C(x), so
the green solid-line triangle (with the base deﬁned by line C(xo)) is larger than the red solid-line triangle (with the
base deﬁned by line C(x∗)). x∗generates the largest social surplus B(x) −C(x) + φ · e(x), hence the pink shaded
triangle (with the base deﬁned by C(x∗) −φ · e(x∗)) is greater than the green shaded triangle (with the base deﬁned
by C(xo)−φ ·e(xo)). The ﬁrst best is deﬁned as {x∗, P∗(x∗), Q∗(x∗)}. Panel (d) illustrates the welfare loss from the
monopoly relative to the ﬁrst best. It shows the distortions from two market failures: i) product attributes is distorted
due to environmental externality; and ii) quantity is distorted due to both market power and environmental externality.
The difference between Qm(xo) and Q∗(xo) is driven by market power while that between Q∗(xo) and Q∗(x∗) is
driven by the fact that attribute xo is less environmental friendly than attribute x∗.
42


===== [PAGE 45] =====

Figure 2: Perfect Targeting vs. Imperfect Targeting
Case I: Perfect Targeting
(a) Attribute Space
x1
x2
x∗= xo +t∗·d⇀
xe
xo
d⇀
xe
t > 0
t < 0
(b) Product Market
SW(x∗)
Q
P
Q
 P−B(x∗)

MR
P∗(x∗)
C(x∗)−t∗·e(x∗)
C(x∗)−t∗·e(x∗)−T ∗
T ∗
Q∗(x∗)
Case II: Imperfect Targeting
(c) Attribute Space
x1
x2
xo
x∗
d⇀
xe
A
B
xz
d⇀xz
(d) Product Market
SW(xz)
Q
P
MR
P∗(xz)
C(xz)−φ ·e(xz)
C(xz)−tz ·z(xz)
C(xz)−(T z +tz ·z(xz))
Q
 P−B(xz)

Q∗(xz)
T z
Notes: Panels (a) and (b) depict the case of perfect targeting, while Panels (c) and (d) illustrate the case of imperfect
targeting. Panel (a) shows that the optimal subsidy intensity t∗induces the ﬁrm to choose the socially optimal attributes
x∗. The line connecting xo and x∗denotes the ﬁrm’s best responses to different subsidy intensities: any point on the
line represents the ﬁrm’s optimal attribute choice for a given subsidy intensity t (see Appendix A.1). Panel (b) shows
that given x∗, the optimal base subsidy T ∗induces the monopoly to choose the socially optimal quantity Q∗(x∗). The
green triangle represents the social welfare under the ﬁrst-best outcome. Panel (c) shows that when the policy attribute
differs from the externality (i.e., z ̸= e), the ﬁrst-best attributes x∗cannot be attained as the ﬁrm responds to the subsidy
intensity t along the line connecting xo and xz. The best attribute that is attained under imperfect targeting is xz. Panel
(d) illustrates the optimal choice of T given xz. T z induces monopoly to choose Q∗(xz), the socially optimal quantity
for product design xz. The green triangle represents the social welfare with {xz, P∗(xz) Q∗(xz)}, which is smaller
than the green triangle in Panel (b).
43


===== [PAGE 46] =====

Figure 3: Policy Choice with a Budget Constraint
(a) Second-Best Attribute Choice
x1
x2
d⇀xz
xo
xz
with BC=R
x∗
xz
w/o BC
Iso-social-surplus (SNB)
dSNB
dt
< 0
dSNB
dt
> 0
(b) Policy Comparison
x1
x2
x∗
xo
z
xz
with BC=R
z′
˜x
(c) Optimal Policy Attribute
x1
x2
x∗
xo
z4
z3
z2
z1
4 3 2
1
Optimal policy attribute changes
as budget increases
Notes: This ﬁgure demonstrates the optimal choices of policy attribute z and subsidy intensity t when the planner
cannot eradicate market power due to a limited budget. In Panel (a), ‘xz
w/o BC’ provides the highest per-unit social
surplus given the policy attribute z without a budget constraint. With a limited budget, the planner chooses subsidy
rates (T,t) to maximize social welfare under z with budget R, which induces the monopolist to choose ‘xz
with BC=R.’
Panel (b) compares two policy attributes. Suppose policy attribute z does not go through a tangency point between
iso-social-surplus and iso-private surplus curves. Any policy line that penetrates the blue lens leads to higher social
welfare with the same budget constraint. For example, policy z′ (and its corresponding optimally chosen subsidy rates
(T ′,t′)) dominates z (and T,t) in terms of social welfare. Panel (c) illustrates the choice of optimal policy attribute
z. The red dots in Panel (c) are the tangency points between the iso-social- and iso-private-surplus curves. As the
government budget increases, the optimal policy line shifts from z1 to z4, and the corresponding product attributes
move away from xo toward x∗.
44


===== [PAGE 47] =====

Figure 4: Distribution of Driving Ranges among BEV Models during 2015-2018
(a) 2015
(b) 2016
(c) 2017
(d) 2018
Notes: The horizontal lines represent the driving ranges of BEVs with a bin size of 10km. The dark blue bars represent
the BEV models with a driving range just above the policy thresholds of the corresponding years. The light blue bars
show the number of BEVs for which the driving range cutoffs are not binding. Bunching is pronounced. In addition,
ﬁrms adjust driving ranges in response to the annual changes in subsidy cutoffs.
45


===== [PAGE 48] =====

Figure 5: Changes in Vehicle Attributes
Notes: The top ﬁgure plots the year-to-year changes in net vehicle weight (exclusive of battery weight) on x-axis,
and battery capacity on y-axis by vehicle model. The blue circles depict models with increasing driving ranges; the
size of the circle represents the magnitude of the change. The red diamonds depict models with decreasing driving
ranges; these changes are small, as shown by the sizes of the diamonds. The bottom ﬁgure depicts the histograms of
the changes in driving range.
Figure 6: Semi-elasticities and Implied Markups
(a) Semi-elasticity
(b) Markup
Notes: The left panel plots the price semi-elasticities, the % increase in sales when the price decreases by ¥1,000,
against consumer prices (net of central and local subsidies). The right panel plots the markups (ﬁrm price as deﬁned
in Equation (7) minus marginal cost) against post-subsidy consumer prices. The red dots represent EVs while the blue
dots represent ICEs.
46


===== [PAGE 49] =====

Figure 7: Bloomberg Battery Pack Prices and Estimated Battery Costs
Notes:
The blue bars represents Lithium-ion battery pack price (in 2018 $/kWh) from 2012 to 2018 from
BloombergNEF’s annual battery price survey. The pink bars show the battery cost estimates from our model. Our
cost estimates are higher than Bloomberg prices because they include additional costs, such as installation costs. Ac-
cording to BloombergNEF’s survey, battery costs declined by around 20% annually from 2012 to 2018, consistent
with our estimates.
Figure 8: Notched versus Linear Subsidies
Notes: The ﬁgure depicts the observed distribution of BEVs’ driving ranges under the notched subsidy policy in 2017
(in red) and the counterfactual distribution under the linear subsidy design (T +t· driving range) (in blue). Aggregate
subsidy expenditures are the same under both designs. With a linear subsidy, bunching along the cutoffs disappears
and the social welfare increases by ¥135 million.
47


===== [PAGE 50] =====

Figure 9: Vehicle Attributes under Different Policy Designs
(a) Vehicle price (MSRP)
(b) Battery capacity
(c) Net weight
(d) Driving range
Notes: The plots depict average vehicle attributes (price, battery capacity, net vehicle weight exclusive of battery
weight, and driving range) under the uniform subsidy and four attribute-based subsidies (ABS) for BEVs. All ﬁve
scenarios have the same subsidy budget. The base subsidy rate T and the subsidy intensity t under linear ABS are
chosen to maximize social welfare given the budget level.
48


===== [PAGE 51] =====

Figure 10: Markup Changes under ABS Relative to Uniform Subsidies by Price Quartiles
(a) Notched Range Subsidy
(b) Linear Range Subsidy
(c) Capacity Subsidy
(d) Weight Subsidy
Notes: The plots illustrate changes in markups (measured by post-subsidy consumer price minus marginal cost) when
we move from a uniform subsidy to attribute-based subsidies (ABS) in each quartile of the price distribution (denoted
by the x-axis). Relative to the uniform subsidy, ABS designs lead to a much bigger reduction in markups for products
with above-median prices. These products tend to experience larger quantity distortions as a result of high markups.
Capacity subsidy leads to the largest markup reduction among higher-priced products.
49


===== [PAGE 52] =====

Table 1: Consumer Subsidies for EVs from the Central Government
Type
Range
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
≥80km
35,000
33,250
31,500
-
-
-
≥100km
25,000
20,000
-
≥150km
50,000
47,500
45,000
45,000
36,000
15,000
BEV
≥200km
24,000
≥250km
60,000
57,000
54,000
55,000
44,000
34,000
≥300km
45,000
≥400km
50,000
PHEV
≥50km
35,000
33,250
31,500
30,000
24,000
22,000
Notes: The table presents subsidies in ¥ for EV buyers offered by the central government from 2013 to 2018. The
exchange rate between US dollar and Chinese RMB was between 6.2 and 7 (¥/$) during the period.
Table 2: Summary Statistics
ICEs
EVs
# of Obs.
Mean
Std. Dev.
# of Obs.
Mean
Std. Dev.
Panel A: Model-city-year observations for demand-side analysis
Sales
28,661
1056.58
1335.01
5,628
150.07
659.92
MSRP (¥10k)
28,661
15.46
8.79
5,628
19.62
6.93
Net weight (10kg)
28,661
141.32
21.87
5,628
121.90
41.10
Horsepower
28,661
146.29
37.17
5,628
127.47
92.67
Fuel economy (L/100km)
28,661
6.85
0.95
1,433
1.74
0.36
Engine size (L)
28,661
1.66
0.25
1,433
1.60
0.32
Central subsidy (¥10k)
-
-
-
5,628
3.76
1.32
Local subsidy (¥10k)
-
-
-
5,628
1.33
1.41
Driving range (km)
-
-
-
5,628
208.02
112.11
Battery capacity (kWh)
-
-
-
5,628
29.94
15.85
Battery density (kWh/10kg)
-
-
-
5,628
1.11
0.23
Panel B: Model-year observations for supply-side analysis
Sales
1,261
24014.72
30916.53
279
3027.20
4493.07
MSRP (¥10k)
1,261
14.40
8.48
279
19.43
7.58
Net weight (10kg)
1,261
142.52
23.88
279
118.66
38.44
Horsepower
1,261
144.77
37.13
279
116.06
80.88
Fuel economy (L/100km)
1,261
6.99
1.06
61
1.79
0.40
Engine size (L)
1,261
1.66
0.26
61
1.59
0.32
Driving range (km)
-
-
-
279
205.68
105.19
Battery capacity (kWh)
-
-
-
279
29.72
15.73
Battery density (kWh/10kg)
-
-
-
279
1.10
0.23
Notes: Panel A shows the summary statistics for the demand analysis that uses city by year by model level observations
during 2015-2018 for the top 40 cities with the largest EV sales in China. Panel B shows the summary statistics for the
supply-side analysis that uses model-by-year level observations. The summary statistics for fuel economy and engine
size under the EV columns are only computed for PHEVs. There are 84 ﬁrms, 497 ICE models, 164 BEV models, and
38 PHEV models during the sample period.
50


===== [PAGE 53] =====

Table 3: Estimates of Preference Parameters
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS Logit
IV Logit
Full Model
Coef.
S.E.
Coef.
S.E.
Coef.
S.E.
Linear Parameters
Price (¥10k)
0.01
0.00
-0.16
0.02
-
-
log(net vehicle weight)
-0.15
0.12
2.48
0.51
5.58
0.30
log(driving range)
0.46
0.07
0.87
0.09
1.09
0.16
Fuel economy (L/100km)
-0.05
0.01
-0.14
0.03
-0.23
0.03
Horsepower
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.02
0.00
Engine size (displacement, L)
-0.21
0.05
0.81
0.12
0.83
0.05
Price Sensitivity: αi = −exp(α1 +α2log(yim)+σpν p
im)
α1 (constant)
-
-
-
-
2.31
0.35
α2 (income)
-
-
-
-
-1.21
0.12
σp (random coefﬁcient on price)
-
-
-
-
0.59
0.11
Other Random Coefﬁcients: σx
Constant
-
-
-
-
3.16
0.28
EV
-
-
-
-
1.72
0.57
Displacement (L)
-
-
-
-
0.25
0.62
No. of observations
34,329
34,329
34,329
Notes: Column (1) reports results for the multinomial logit regression without any instruments. Columns (2) and
(3) instrument price, vehicle weight, and driving range with four sets of IVs: (1) the central subsidies; (2) the
sales tax rate; (3) wheelbase; and (4) supplier dummies and their interactions with battery weight. Column (3) is
the random coefﬁcient multinomial logit model and is estimated using simulated GMM with micro-moments. Net
vehicle weight is the same as curb weight for ICEs and excludes battery weight for EVs. The price coefﬁcient αi is
speciﬁed as −exp(α1 +α2log(yim)+σpν p
im where yim is consumer income and ν p
im is unobserved preference shocks
(i.i.d. log-normal draws). All regressions include city-by-year-by-fuel type (ICE or EV) ﬁxed effects, brand-by-
year-by-fuel type ﬁxed effects, segment ﬁxed effects, and vintage ﬁxed effects (the year when the model was ﬁrst
introduced into the market).
51


===== [PAGE 54] =====

Table 4: Technology Frontier: Determinants of Driving Range
Full Sample
Commercially Launched
BEVs
PHEVs
BEVs
PHEVs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Dep. var: driving range (km)
Coef.
S.E.
Coef.
S.E.
Coef.
S.E.
Coef.
S.E.
Battery capacity (kWh)
6.17
0.15
6.07
0.29
6.05
0.19
4.24
0.37
Net vehicle weight (10kg)
-1.06
0.07
-0.47
0.05
-1.06
0.08
-0.37
0.07
Battery density (kWh/10kg)
27.24
7.47
-8.00
7.48
24.25
9.55
-3.00
10.32
Engine displacement (L)
5.68
3.53
14.60
4.75
# of observations
926
175
553
86
Adj. R2
0.90
0.79
0.90
0.74
Notes: The dependent variable is driving range in km. The results are from OLS. Columns (1) and (2) use the full
sample that includes all BEVs and PHEVs (at the trim level) that underwent the driving range test administered by
China’s Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT). MIIT conducted 22 batches of tests during our
sample period, for a total of 926 BEV trims and 175 PHEV trims. Columns (3) and (4) use the subset of trims
that were commercially launched in the Chinese market. Columns (1) and (3) report results for BEVs and Columns
(2) and (4) report results for PHEVs. Net vehicle weight excludes the weight of batteries. All regressions include
the ﬁxed effects for the test result announcement dates to control for the technology progress as well as potential
differences in testing technology and methodology over time.
52


===== [PAGE 55] =====

Table 5: Marginal Cost, Fixed Cost, and Shadow Value Estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
OLS
GMM with
GMM with
common slackness
model speciﬁc λj
Panel A: Marginal cost (¥10k)
Coef.
S.E.
Coef.
S.E.
Coef.
S.E.
γw
Net vehicle weight (10kg)
0.08
0.01
0.11
0.01
0.11
0.01
γk
Battery capacity (kWh)
0.05
0.01
0.36
0.05
0.36
0.04
ρ
Battery cost depreciation
0.80
0.03
0.80
0.03
γ other
Horsepower
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.00
Displacement (L)
2.68
0.37
2.60
0.45
2.60
0.45
Fuel consumption (L/100km)
-0.69
0.11
-0.65
0.11
-0.67
0.11
Year FE (base year: 2015)
2016
-0.43
0.15
-0.28
0.15
-0.29
0.15
2017
-0.98
0.15
-0.68
0.15
-0.69
0.15
2018
-1.71
0.16
-1.15
0.16
-1.17
0.16
Panel B: Fixed cost (¥10k)
φw
Net vehicle weight (10kg)
-24.53
85.34
-37.40
74.58
φk
Battery capacity (kWh)
842.96
414.53
907.4
299.6
Panel C: Shadow value (¥10k/1km)
E[λ|W]
Slackness parameter
198.9
89.1
ζ
Sales
0.014
0.007
Notes: Column (1) reports the OLS results for the marginal cost Equation (10). Columns (2) and (3) estimate all
marginal and ﬁxed cost parameters simultaneously using GMM. Column (2) estimates the slackness parameters in
Equations (12) and (13) for observations with binding constraints following Moon and Schorfheide (2009). Column
(3) estimates the product-speciﬁc shadow value λj as a function of sales. The number of observations is 1,540 for
Panel A and 279 for Panels B and C. In Panel A, parameters γw and γ other (coefﬁcients for other exogenous variables
in the marginal cost equation) are for both EVs and ICEs; the other parameters are only for EVs. Parameters γw and
ρt · γk represent the marginal cost slope with respect to weight and battery capacity, and ρ captures battery costs’
annual depreciation relative to the base year 2015. The estimated battery cost decreased from ¥3,620/kWh in 2015
to ¥1,874/kWh in 2018. In Panel B, φw and φk represent the slope of ﬁxed costs with respect to net vehicle weight
and battery capacity. In Panel C, the ζ estimate implies that EV makers are willing to pay ¥140 per vehicle to
reduce the binding driving range constraint by 1km. All estimations include year, fuel type, segment, and brand
ﬁxed effects separately for marginal costs and ﬁxed costs.
53


===== [PAGE 56] =====

Table 6: Welfare Impacts of ABS Subsidies Relative to Uniform Subsidy
Changes relative to the uniform subsidy
Notched
Range
Linear
Range
Capacity
Weight
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
∆Total welfare (in ¥mil.)
97.2
232.1
448.0
376.7
∆Consumer surplus
226.2
316.7
643.2
679.9
BEV
-16.0
57.0
92.1
5.4
∆Firm Proﬁt
PHEV
-3.8
-4.7
-8.9
-7.3
ICE
-38.8
-52.6
-123.3
-119.5
Total
-58.6
-0.2
-40.1
-121.5
CO2
60.6
71.9
131.2
151.7
∆Emissions
PM
1.2
1.6
3.0
3.6
NOx
8.1
10.5
18.4
20.7
SO2
0.5
0.4
2.6
5.8
Total
70.4
84.4
155.2
181.8
Notes: Aggregate central subsidies are ﬁxed in all columns. The unit is ¥million (in 2017) for all cells. Each cell
represents the change under an attribute-based subsidy (ABS) relative to the uniform subsidy. The four columns are
the observed notched-range subsidy and the optimal linear design (i.e., the two-part tariff) based on driving range,
battery capacity, and vehicle weight, respectively. The rows titled ‘∆Emissions’ represent monetized health damages
(in ¥mil.) from increased emissions: a positive value implies an increase in the health costs of emissions relative to
the uniform subsidy.
54


===== [PAGE 57] =====

Table 7: Channels Underlying Welfare Changes
Panel A: Welfare Decomposition
Welfare changes relative
Beneﬁts from
Beneﬁts from
to uniform subsidy
Improved Attributes
Mitigating Market Power
(in ¥mil.)
Range
Capacity
Weight
Range
Capacity
Weight
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
∆Total welfare
97.8
277.7
209.5
134.3
170.3
167.2
∆CS and Proﬁt
CS
138.8
375.3
401.5
178.0
267.9
278.5
Proﬁt
-16.1
-49.1
-138.8
15.9
9.0
17.3
Total
122.7
326.3
262.7
193.8
276.8
295.8
∆Emissions
24.9
48.6
53.2
59.6
106.5
128.6
Panel B: Welfare Changes from Subsidy Redistribution
Welfare gains from
ABS Design with
subsidy redistribution
Optimal Tj
(in ¥mil.)
Range
Capacity
Weight
(1)
(2)
(3)
∆Total welfare
143.2
152.6
190.2
∆CS and Proﬁt
CS
121.8
112.6
153.6
Proﬁt
36.8
50.7
55.5
Total
158.6
163.3
209.1
∆Emissions
15.4
10.7
18.9
Notes: Aggregate central subsidies are ﬁxed in all columns. The unit is ¥million (in 2017) for all cells. Panel A
decomposes welfare gains into two sources: improved attributes and reduced market power distortions. In the ﬁrst
three columns, we ﬁx subsidy expenditures at the baseline (the uniform subsidy) but use the equilibrium attributes
associated with each ABS and allow ﬁrms to adjust prices and quantities given the ABS attributes. This isolates the
effect of improved attributes. In the last three columns, attributes are the same as the ﬁrst three columns but subsidies
adjust to the ABS level. ABS designs provide more subsidies to products with above-median prices and are more
effective at mitigating market power distortions. In Panel B, we allocate subsidies optimally at the product level in the
form of Tj +t ∗z(X) with a product-speciﬁc base subsidy Tj. Welfare further improves due to the improved subsidy
redistribution that better addresses varying degrees of distortions among products (i.e., higher subsidies to products
with more severe distortions and with demand more responsive to subsidies).
55
