==============================================================================
【文献】Gillingham, Houde & van Benthem (2021). Consumer Myopia in Vehicle Purchases: Evidence from a Natural Experiment. AEJ: Economic Policy 13(3): 207-238.
【编号】A14　【简称】GHvB2021　【分组】标签与信念
【原文 PDF】D:\codex\output\blp_bundle_20261007\package\01_existing_fuel_batch\original_pdfs\P15_Gillingham2021_Myopia.pdf
【页数】32 页　【页码换算】印刷（期刊）页码 = PDF 页码 + 206
【文本来源】PyMuPDF 抽取 PDF 文字层（按版面块排序）
【公式校正】3 条，按页附在对应页末（以「公式校正」标出），LaTeX 书写，均已对照原页图
【校正说明】AEJ: Economic Policy 期刊版，期刊页 = PDF 页 + 206。正文只给 (1)(2) 两个编号式；把价格变化换算成支付意愿的边界式在期刊版放在在线附录 D.3，本地没有该附录。
【核对页图】D:\blp-auto-fulltext-pack-20261008\work\pages\A14_pNN.png（本轮渲染）；本包 核对页图\ 文件夹内有副本
【使用提醒】正文是机器抽取的原文，不是译文；公式区以页末校正或原 PDF 为准。页标记中的 PDF 页码可直接用于在原 PDF 中翻页定位。
==============================================================================

===== [PDF 第 1 页｜印刷第 207 页] =====
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2021, 13(3): 207–238
https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20200322



           Consumer Myopia in Vehicle Purchases:
              Evidence from a Natural Experiment†

                By Kenneth T. Gillingham, Sébastien Houde, and
                        Arthur A. van Benthem*


         A central question in the analysis of ­fuel economy policy is whether
            consumers are myopic with regards to future fuel costs. We pro-
              vide the first evidence on the consumer valuation of fuel economy
            from a natural experiment that provides exogenous variation in ­fuel
           economy ratings. We examine the ­short-run equilibrium effects of a
              restatement of ­fuel economy ratings that affected 1.6 million vehi-
                cles. Using the implied changes in ­willingness to pay, we find that
            consumers act myopically: consumers are indifferent between $1.00
               in discounted fuel costs and $0.­16–0.39 in the purchase price when
             discounting at 4 percent. This undervaluation persists under a wide
            range of assumptions.     D12, L62, L71,                              (JEL              L11)


          he transportation sector is now the largest contributor of carbon dioxide emis-
           sions in the United States, and emissions from petroleum constituted 46 percent T
       of all ­energy-related carbon dioxide emissions in 2019     Energy Information                                               (US      Administration         ­Fuel economy regulations are the dominant policy to reduce                     2020).      carbon dioxide emissions from the transportation sector in the United States and
     many other countries, despite economists long arguing for a Pigouvian gasoline tax
       to internalize climate change             externalities      and Small                                (and other)             (Parry          2005).           ­Fuel economy standards require automakers to meet average ­fuel economy tar-
       gets for new ­light-duty vehicles. A common argument for such standards is that they
      “save consumers money” due to buyers undervaluing fuel economy at the time of
       the vehicle purchase        Walls, and Harrington       This argument suggests                             (Parry,                      2007).       that consumers are buying lower fuel economy vehicles, with higher fuel costs, than
        is ex post privately optimal for them. Such apparent myopia is a common explana-
       tion for what has become known as the “energy efficiency gap,” whereby consumers




             * Gillingham: Yale University and NBER                                   Houde: Grenoble Ecole                                                        (email: kenneth.gillingham@yale.edu);        de Management                                        van Benthem: The Wharton School, University of                          (email: sebastien.houde@­grenoble-em.com);        Pennsylvania                                 Lucas Davis was coeditor for this article. The authors are grate-                       (email: arthurv@wharton.upenn.edu).          ful to many conference and seminar participants at the 2019 AERE conference; the 2019 EMEE workshop; the 2019
         Northeast Workshop on Energy Policy and Environmental Economics; the 2019 Workshop on Climate Economics,
         Innovation and Policy; Georgetown University; NHH Bergen; RWI Essen; Simon Fraser University; Stanford
         University; University of California Davis; University of Connecticut; University of Copenhagen; University of
        Maryland; University of Pennsylvania; Uppsala University; USC; VU Amsterdam; and Yale University.
            † Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20200322 to visit the article page for additional materials and author
         disclosure             or to comment in the online discussion forum.                    statement(s)
                                                    207

===== [PDF 第 2 页｜印刷第 208 页] =====
208               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021

do not adopt seemingly ­high-return ­energy-efficiency investments          1979;                                                   (HausmanGillingham, Newell, and Palmer 2009; Allcott and Greenstone        Indeed, there                                                          2012).1is a large and growing behavioral economics literature documenting cases where
consumers appear inattentive to available information or otherwise seem to misopti-
mize in many settings, such as health plans         and Gruber 2011,        sales                                     (Abaluck                 2016),taxes        Looney, and Kroft      and heuristics for ­large-number processing      (Chetty,                  2009),          Pope, and Sydnor(Lacetera,                  2012).2  This paper presents the first evidence on the consumer valuation of fuel economy
from a natural experiment providing exogenous variation in the ­fuel economy ratings
that ­new-vehicle buyers observe. In 2012, after an audit by the US Environmental
Protection Agency         the two major automakers Hyundai and Kia acknowl-                 (EPA),edged that they had overstated the fuel economy for 13 important vehicle models
from the ­2011–2013 model years by 1 to 6 ­miles per gallon. This overstatement—by
far the largest in history—affected over 1.6 million vehicles sold, including several
popular models such as the Hyundai Elantra and Kia Rio. Hyundai and Kia blamed
a “procedural error” in the mileage testing and had to abruptly change the official
­fuel economy ratings for these vehicles. Following the restatement, the automakers
agreed to compensate buyers who had already purchased vehicles with misstated
ratings, while new-car buyers after the restatement did not receive compensation
    Motors America, Inc.      The restatement was unexpected—even just prior(Kia                     2020).to it, Hyundai and Kia often advertised the high fuel economy of their vehicles as a
major selling feature.
  We first examine the equilibrium price response by consumers and firms to this
large unexpected restatement.3 Using detailed microdata on all new vehicle transac-
tions in the United States over the period August 2011 to June 2014 and exploiting
variation across affected and unaffected vehicles produced by Hyundai and Kia,
we find a 1.2 percent decline in the equilibrium prices of the affected models                                                                                       (justunder     We do not find any evidence of diminished overall brand perception      $300).for Hyundai and Kia vehicles around the restatement. The change in equilibrium
price demonstrates that the rated fuel economy of vehicles is valued by market par-
ticipants. We then proceed by putting these results into context by estimating the
consumer valuation of fuel economy.
  Using our preferred set of valuation assumptions, our results indicate that con-
sumers are indifferent between $1.00 in future gasoline costs and ­$0.16–0.39 in the
vehicle purchase price    “valuation parameter” of           depending on the                        (a                            0.­16–0.39)affected model year and using a discount rate of 4 percent. We find that consum-
ers systematically undervalue fuel economy in vehicle purchases to a larger degree



                                                  Hausman 1979; Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer   1 We follow a common terminology in the existing literature (e.g.,      and use the term “myopia” to describe a range of behavioral phenomena leading to undervaluation, which2013a)could include biased beliefs, lack of salience, rational inattention, and present bias.
    2 Our study also relates to papers that have examined how consumers and market performance respond to
information disclosure in various contexts, including financial decisions      and Saez 2003; Bertrand and Morse                                                                 (Duflo2011; Goda, Manchester, and Sojourner        take-up of social programs          and Manoli        sexu-                                      2014),                          (Bhargava            2015),ally risky behavior               vehicle choice        and Zettelmeyer         electricity consumption                (Dupas 2011),                (Tadelis                2015),                        (Jessoeand Rapson      and educational investment           2014),                          (Jensen 2010).    3 In focusing on the equilibrium effects of the restatement, our study relates to the literature estimating the
equilibrium effects of boycotts on firms or products     Chavis and Leslie 2009; Hendel, Lach, and Spiegel                                                            (e.g.,                                               2017).

===== [PDF 第 3 页｜印刷第 209 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        209

than reported by much of the recent literature. This conclusion is robust to a wide
range of valuation assumptions, including vehicle supply elasticities and the pres-
ence of imperfect competition, as we illustrate in a bounding exercise. We also show
that the undervaluation is unlikely to be explained by strategic price spillovers to
­nonaffected models, consumer selection, slow updating of beliefs, or reduced trust
and willingness to rely on EPA ratings following the restatement—the undervalu-
ation persists even when only including car buyers who started their search months
after the restatement and were likely unaware that the ratings had ever changed.
   Previous studies estimating the consumer valuation of fuel economy use several
different identification strategies, but most leverage changes in gasoline prices to
test whether vehicle prices fully adjust with the changes in the expected discounted
present value of future fuel costs. This basic approach was used as early as the 1980s,
with Kahn        finding that used-car prices adjust only one-third to one-half the          (1986)amount that would be expected based on the changes in future fuel costs induced by
shocks to gasoline costs and arguing that used-car buyers must be myopic.
  More recent studies have documented a wide range of valuation parameter esti-
mates. Grigolon, Reynaert, and Verboven       use temporal variation in gasoline                                     (2018)prices combined with ­cross-sectional variation in engine technology to find a ­central
case valuation parameter of 0.91 in Europe. Allcott and Wozny        exploit vari-                                                        (2014)ation in gasoline prices and estimate a ­central case valuation parameter of 0.76
for used vehicle purchasers in the United States. These results suggest more lim-
ited undervaluation of fuel economy. Allcott and Wozny also present a wide range
around their preferred estimate       0.42 to      due to different assumptions                            (from         1.01)going into the calculation of the discounted present value of future fuel savings.
Several other recent studies present estimates centered around one, implying that
consumers fully value future fuel savings. Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer                                                                  (2013a)also rely on ­gasoline price variation and use both new and used vehicle data, while
Sallee, West, and Fan        estimate their model with used vehicle auction data                    (2016)and use variation in odometer readings. Taken together, these studies suggest mod-
est undervaluation at most.4 In contrast, Leard, Linn, and Zhou       use data from                                                       (2017)new vehicles in the United States and exploit the timing of adoption of ­fuel-saving
technologies. They find a substantially lower valuation parameter of 0.54. Leard,
Linn, and Springel       employ ­cross-sectional variation in engine technologies                 (2019)and find even lower values; most of their estimates are below 0.30.
  We contribute to this literature in two main ways. First, we demonstrate that
the ­fuel economy rating itself is indeed valued in equilibrium using as variation
an exogenous and sudden shifter of the official fuel economy rating, in a context
that is appealing because the vehicles themselves are identical before and after the
change. Previous studies have used fuel economy ratings to construct a measure of
fuel operating costs but could not test whether the market participants respond to
the rating itself. The rating is the primary source of information provided by the
government and features prominently on dealer lots and on all major automotive
websites that help ­car-shopping consumers compare fuel economy across different


   4 Some earlier studies that do not explicitly estimate a valuation parameter similarly suggest full valuation of
fuel economy          1998, Verboven            (Goldberg               2002).

===== [PDF 第 4 页｜印刷第 210 页] =====
210               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021

vehicles. Second, we are the first to quantify the valuation of fuel economy using
a natural experiment that provides ­policy-relevant variation in expected future fuel
costs through changes in the rating itself rather than changes in gasoline prices.
  Our estimates are especially relevant for informing the intense debate on whether
­fuel economy standards are justified from a private perspective.5 If consumers
undervalue fuel economy in ­new-vehicle purchases, this implies that it is possible
for a policy that shifts consumers into more efficient vehicles to be ­welfare improv-
ing, even if environmental externalities are fully internalized by other policies. We
use a novel approach to provide guidance to policymakers on this critical parameter
for understanding the costs and benefits of ­fuel economy standards. Our natural
experiment—a revision of ­fuel economy ratings—may be particularly relevant to
studying more stringent ­fuel economy standards, as consumers would be informed
of the higher fuel economy through the ratings.
  We also contribute by highlighting two new issues in this literature that help
reconcile discrepancies across estimates. First, we demonstrate the quantitative
importance of estimating a ­fuel economy valuation parameter directly rather than
approximating it using average changes in equilibrium prices, quantities, and dis-
counted changes in fuel expenditures—an approach commonly taken in the liter-
ature. In our sample, the approximation yields a valuation parameter that is more
than double the correct value, which is large enough to substantially alter the con-
clusions of a valuation study. Second, we show that if there is market power in the
automobile market, ­willingness-to-pay estimates that ignore this will overestimate
the valuation of fuel economy.
  Our undervaluation result suggests that a variety of behavioral channels may be
at play, although we cannot quantify their relative importance. Inattention to ­fuel
economy ratings, a lack of sophistication to correctly process ­fuel economy infor-
mation, a variety of             beliefs about fuel economy potentially paired with                     (incorrect)slow updating toward the true value, and consumers relying on other sources of
information in addition to the rating are all possible explanations for why consumers
on average are not willing to pay the full discounted benefits of higher fuel economy
vehicles when the official rating is changed.
  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We next describe the natural
experiment. In Section II, we discuss the data. Section III presents the empirical strat-
egy and main results that show how the market responded to the information shock
provided by the restatement. In Section IV, we estimate consumers’ valuation of
future fuel costs and discuss and interpret our estimates. The final section concludes.

                            I.  The 2012 ­Fuel Economy Rating Restatement

   In many countries around the world, automakers are required to report the ­fuel
economy performance of all new vehicles offered on the market. In the United States,
this reported value is randomly audited by the EPA and considered a ­reasonable


    5 In the United States, the Trump administration is in the process of weakening the standards based on a
­benefit-cost analysis that explicitly incorporates assumptions about the degree of consumer valuation of fuel econ-
omy         et al.      See Davenport    (Bento      2018).               (2018).

===== [PDF 第 5 页｜印刷第 211 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        211

­estimate of the true ­on-road fuel economy of the vehicle. This EPA rating plays a
prominent role: it is used by automakers in advertising, used in ­auto-shopping web-
sites, and required to be conspicuously displayed on every new vehicle at the dealer
lot as part of an EPA ­fuel economy label.6
  On November 2, 2012, the EPA issued a press release stating that “in processing
test data, Hyundai and Kia allegedly chose favorable results rather than average
results from a large number of tests.”7 This was a result of a 2012 EPA audit of
the model year 2012 Hyundai Elantra, which revealed a large discrepancy between
the test results and the ­self-reported fuel economy provided by Hyundai. Based on
this finding, the EPA expanded its investigation to other Hyundai and Kia vehicles,
uncovering many more discrepancies, all of which overstated fuel economy. The
two automakers claimed that “honest mistakes” had been made, such as a “data
processing error related to the coastdown testing method.”8
  Immediately after the EPA press release, the ­fuel economy ratings for all affected
vehicles were updated on all new-car-comparison websites, at www.fueleconomy.gov,
and on the EPA ­fuel economy labels on all new vehicles on dealers’ lots. Hyundai
and Kia were also required to update all advertising that mentioned the incorrect
­fuel economy ratings. At the time of the restatement, over 900,000 vehicles with
incorrect ­fuel economy labels had already been sold, which amounted to roughly
35 percent of all ­2011–2013 models sold through October 2012 by the 2 automak-
ers. Tables A.1 and A.2 in online Appendix A provide a list of the restated models
and the change in ­miles per gallon for each. Combined ratings, which reflect an
average of city and highway driving, were adjusted downward by up to four ­miles
per gallon; highway ratings went down by up to six ­miles per gallon.
   Prior to the restatement, Hyundai and Kia often mentioned the high fuel economy
of their vehicles as a selling point.9 This added to the unexpected and abrupt nature
of the restatement. Following the restatement, the automakers offered compensa-
tion to buyers that had already purchased vehicles with misstated fuel economies
    online Appendix A for      New vehicles offered after the restatement—the(see                          details).focus of our analysis—were not subject to the compensation.

                                                    II.  Data

  Our first dataset contains all ­dealer-reported new vehicle transactions in the United
States from August 2011 to June 2014 from R.L. Polk      Polk                                                       (R.L.      ­2011–2014).These data include the vehicle identification number        prefix      known as                                           (VIN)       (oftenthe “VIN10” because it includes the first ten digits that provide information about



    6 See online Appendix A for more details on the ratings and the label, including an example label. Note that the
EPA ratings are different from the compliance ratings for the Corporate Average Fuel Economy          ­standards.                                                                      (CAFE)These compliance ratings are based on a laboratory test established in 1978. The EPA revised the consumer ratings
downward in 1986, and again in 2008, to more accurately reflect ­real-world driving conditions and fuel economy.
However, to determine automakers’ compliance with CAFE, the government continues to use ­fuel economy values
based on the 1978 test procedure.
    7 The incident was covered by the press, e.g., see Vlasic (2012).
    8 See Bruce (2014).                                                               “Hyundai aggressively advertised the    9 Consider this quote from a November 2, 2012, article (Bowman 2012):fact that the brand offers four models that boast 40 mpg, but that claim is no longer true.”

===== [PDF 第 6 页｜印刷第 212 页] =====
212               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021

vehicle                 the transaction date, the transaction price, and the Nielsen         characteristics),Designated Market Area        which is a commonly used geographic delineation                  (DMA),for media markets.10 There are 210 DMAs in the United States, and each is a cluster
of similar counties that are covered by a specific group of television stations. The
VIN10 uniquely identifies the vehicle trim, engine size, and further characteristics.
The transaction price is the final price reported to the Department of Motor Vehicles
        of each state. This final price is net of all ­dealer-to-customer incentives in all(DMV)cases we could verify, so if the vehicle costs $40,000 and the dealer offers a $2,000
markdown, the price reported is $38,000. ­Manufacturer-to-dealer incentives will be
at least partly or entirely passed through to the final consumer price, so the DMV
transaction price data should reflect these incentives.11 A limitation of the DMV
price data is that they may not include ­manufacturer-to-customer incentives, and
if Hyundai and Kia responded to the restatement by offering enhanced rebates for
the affected vehicles directly to customers, we could understate the price changes.
Though we were unable to obtain comprehensive data on ­manufacturer-to-customer
incentives, we conducted an extensive review of sources and found no evidence that
incentives changed significantly around the time of the restatement. See Appendix
A for further details.
  Table 1 presents means of key variables for the affected models, ­nonaffected
models by Hyundai and Kia, and all other models in market segments with at least
one affected vehicle. Panel A presents total sales and average transaction prices. For
Hyundai, sales of affected models were about half of total sales, while for Kia, they
comprised about a third. Hyundai and Kia have similar pricing, with the affected
models being priced slightly below the ­nonaffected models. Both automakers spe-
cialize in smaller cars that are priced below the average for other automakers.
  Panel B shows the composition of each of the fleets and some characteristics.
71 percent of the affected Hyundai vehicles are small cars, while 80 percent of the
affected Kia vehicles are crossovers. We thus have identifying variation across dif-
ferent classes of vehicles. Both automakers have unaffected small cars and cross-
overs, providing variation within classes as well. On average, we see that the affected
models tend to have slightly lower weight and cost slightly less than do ­nonaffected
models or models from other automakers.
  For our calculations of the valuation of fuel economy, we bring in data on annual
nationwide gasoline prices from the US Energy Information Administration                                                                (EIA)    Energy Information Administration              vehicle survival rates from(US                                    ­2011–2014),R.L. Polk             and average vehicle miles traveled from the National           (­1993–2009),Highway Traffic Safety Administration                Highway Traffic Safety                           (NHTSA) (NationalAdministration        In sensitivity analysis, we also provide estimates for miles               2018).driven and survival rates from Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer          as well                                                          (2013b)as EIA’s gasoline prices at the ­monthly-national and year-state level     Energy                                                    (USInformation Administration                          ­2011–2014).

    10 The data include all vehicle transactions, including leases. For leased vehicles, the leasing company buys the
vehicle, and the transaction price is recorded.
   11 One caveat is that if ­manufacturer-to-dealer incentives were altered after the restatement, this could poten-
tially shift dealer effort toward different vehicles. In our search of the automobile trade press, we did not find any
evidence that this occurred in our setting.

===== [PDF 第 7 页｜印刷第 213 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        213


              Table 1—Mean Sales, Prices, and Characteristics across Automakers

                                               Affected models                Not affected models

                                        Hyundai      Kia          Hyundai      Kia      Others
                                                   (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)         (5)
Panel A. Sales and transaction prices
Total sales                                    1,041       516            944        1,001     26,300           (1,000s)Price                                          21.6        20.0             24.1        23.5       28.6     (1,000s $)Number of models by model year               16         10             49         36       1,131

Panel B. Selected vehicle characteristics
Fraction sport                                  0.01        0.00             0.03        0.00       0.04
Fraction small car                              0.71        0.18             0.16        0.22       0.33
Fraction large car                               0.09        0.03             0.62        0.41       0.31
Fraction crossover                              0.19        0.80             0.19        0.36       0.33
Engine cylinders                               4.17        4.00             4.23        4.25       4.70
Displacement                                  2.02        1.98             2.39        2.34       1.72                 (liters)Gross vehicle weight                            2.89        2.96             3.28        3.23       3.47
MSRP                                         20.8        18.9             24.1        22.8       28.7       (1,000s $)Fuel economy                                  29.5        25.8             27.0        27.0       26.4               (miles/gallon)
Notes: Data cover August 2011 to June 2014 and include only classes of vehicles that have at least one affected
model. A unit of observation is a ­year-month-DMA-VIN10, and these summary statistics are unweighted. The
number of models by model year refers to all model   model year combinations in each category       that some                                                              ​×​                                         (notemodels have both affected and unaffected trims, and thus, they may fall into both the affected and unaffected catego-
   DMA refers to a Nielsen Designated Market Area, which is an area covering several counties. MSRP refers tories).the manufacturer suggested retail price. MSRP, fuel economy, displacement, and weight are from DataOne                                                                                                         (­2011–       All dollars are nominal dollars.2014).

                        III.  The Equilibrium Effects of the Restatement

   In our empirical investigation, we first proceed by using a ­reduced-form estimator
to show how our natural experiment provides internally valid and robust estimates of
the impact of the restatement on various outcomes. This empirical strategy does not
require making assumptions on how consumers perceive future fuel operating costs.

                     A. Effects on Transaction Prices

  We begin our empirical analysis by examining the equilibrium  effects of
the restatement on new vehicle transaction prices. Our empirical approach is a
­difference-in-difference estimator:
(1)    ​Pric​e​jrt​  =  β 1​(Post Restatement)​t​ × 1​(Affected Model)​j​ + ​ρ​t×Clas​s​j​​ + ​μ​t×Mak​e​j​​
                        ​+  ​η​r​ × 1​(Post Restatement)​t​ + ​η​r​ + ​ω​j​ + ​ϵ​jrt​,

where ​Price​ is either the log or level of the transaction price for a VIN10  ​j​ sold
in region  ​r​         in ­year-month   ​t​,                           is an indicator variable        (DMA)                    ​1​(Post Restatement)​t​for after the restatement in November 2012, and                         is an indicator                                                      ​1​(Affected Model)​j​
variable for an affected model. Our parameter of interest,     is the coefficient on                                                                                                           ​β​,the interaction of these two indicator variables. Our specification exploits the panel
nature of our data along with their high level of disaggregation to address a variety
of potential ­time-invariant and ­time-varying confounders. We include ­year-month

----- 【公式校正｜对照原页图逐式转写，LaTeX】 -----
(1)  Price_{jrt}=\beta\,\mathbf 1(\text{Post Restatement})_t\times\mathbf 1(\text{Affected Model})_j+\rho_{t\times Class_j}+\mu_{t\times Make_j}+\eta_r\times\mathbf 1(\text{Post Restatement})_t+\eta_r+\omega_j+\epsilon_{jrt}
    核对方式：本轮看图；说明：Price 取对数或水平；j 为 VIN10，r 为 DMA，t 为年月；重标在 2012 年 11 月。表 2 第 (6) 列水平值 −294（91）
----- 【公式校正结束】 -----

===== [PDF 第 8 页｜印刷第 214 页] =====
214               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021

indicators interacted with vehicle class indicators            to allow for flexible                                                                                                (​ρ​t×Clas​s​j​​)time controls specific to each vehicle class. We further add ­year-month indicators
interacted with make indicators            for flexible time controls for trends or                                                         (​μ​t×Mak​e​j​​)shocks that equally affect all models from each automaker. These allow us to focus
on variation across affected and unaffected vehicles produced by Hyundai and Kia
      controlling for nonparametric ­automaker-specific time trends to capture any(after­time-varying changes, such as to        We include DMA indicators    and                                   reputation).                                                        (​η​r​)their interaction with the ­postrestatement indicator                              to                                                              (​η​r​ × 1​(Post Restatement)​t​)control for potential compositional changes in the population of consumers buying
a vehicle before and after the restatement. Finally,    are VIN10 fixed effects.12                                                                                                    ​ω​j​We weight the regressions by monthly sales13 and cluster standard errors at the
VIN10 level.14 Finally, we restrict the sample to only include vehicle classes in
which Hyundai and Kia have affected cars: subcompact, compact, midsize, full-size,
sport, compact crossover, and midsize crossover.
  Our identifying variation thus comes from ­within-model and ­within-region price
changes across affected and unaffected vehicles produced by Hyundai and Kia, con-
ditional on flexible time price trends for each vehicle make and class. The source
of the variation in the covariate we care about is the restatement itself, which leads
some vehicles to be affected and others unaffected in a plausibly random way.
Therefore,   is capturing the effect of the restatement on the affected models—our                ​β​desired effect—rather than any diminished brand perception from the restatement
that affects all Hyundai and Kia models equally       effects on the brands would be                                           (suchcaptured by       One advantage of this specification is that it readily facilitates                      ​μ​t×Mak​e​j​​).exploring different sources of variation to identify   In our primary specification,                                                                                                     ​β​.we include all ­nonaffected models in the relevant vehicle classes, but we also exam-
ine cases where we remove close substitute ­nonaffected vehicles from the sample
    test for robustness to price spillovers within or across        or remove all other(to                                                 brands)automakers besides Hyundai and Kia    further confirm that effects on brand equity                                       (toare not influencing our                          results).  We expect our coefficient of interest   to be negative if the market responds in                                                            ​β​equilibrium to the downward adjustment of fuel economy for the affected models.
Table 2 presents our primary results. Columns ­1–3 estimate the model using the log
of the transaction price as the dependent variable. Columns ­4–6 use the price level.
Columns 3 and 6 are the most flexible and therefore our preferred specifications.
The coefficients become slightly larger as we add fixed effects            in                                                               (especially   levels)but are generally quite similar across specifications.
  Our results indicate that the restatement led to a 1.2 percent decrease in equi-
librium transaction prices, which amounts to a $294 decline on average across
all affected models. Figure 1 presents the average treatment effects by month. To


    12 Our identification follows recent studies that use disaggregated panel data. For example, Allcott and Wozny
      and Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer        use monthly temporal variation in gasoline prices after condi-(2014)                                 (2013a)tioning on model year fixed effects. Sallee, West, and Fan        exploit variation in odometer readings within a                                                    (2016)model year while controlling for ­VIN10-year-month.
                                                                    every car sale is a separate    13 This is equivalent to running regressions at the microdata level (i.e.,                                                                                                    observation).    14 Clustering at the VIN10 level allows for arbitrary forms of serial correlation patterns in the error terms, both
over time and across DMAs. In addition, the treatment is                    at the VIN10 level. Clustering at the                                                       (approximately)model level generates very similar, and often slightly smaller, standard errors in Table 2.

===== [PDF 第 9 页｜印刷第 215 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        215


                    Table 2—Effect of Restatement on Transaction Prices

                                                               logs                         Levels
                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)      (5)      (6)
​1 ​(Post Restatement)​t​ × 1 ​(Affected Model)​j​       −0.010   −0.010   −0.012    −150   −259   −294
                                                  (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.003)      (80)     (94)     (91)
­Year-month   class fixed effects                            Yes      Yes               Yes     Yes               ​×​­Year-month  make fixed effects                  Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes     Yes     Yes               ​×​VIN10 fixed effects                             Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes     Yes     Yes
DMA fixed effects                              Yes                Yes       Yes             Yes
            DMA fixed effects           Yes                Yes       Yes             Yes1(Post Restatement) ​×​
­R2                                                0.95      0.92      0.95       0.96     0.95     0.96
Observations                                1.52m    1.52m    1.52m     1.52m   1.52m   1.52m

Notes: Dependent variable  is the log or  level of the transaction price          An observation  is a                                                                                   (in  dollars).­year-month-DMA-VIN10. VIN10 refers to the VIN prefix, which is a ­trim-engine combination. DMA refers to
a Nielsen Designated Market Area, which is an area covering several counties. Class refers to the vehicle class.
Post Restatement refers to the ­year-month being during or after November 2012. All estimations are weighted by
monthly sales. Standard errors clustered by VIN10.





              0.02
                                               Restatement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Monthly
                month
       by                                                                                                                                                         sales
               0                                                        of
                    effect
                                                                                30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      affected

                                                                                20                             treatment           −0.02                                                                                                                                                                                                                 models
                Price                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                               (1,000s)
                                                                                0           −0.04
              2011m7            2012m7            2013m7            2014m7
                                      Year−month


 Figure 1. The Price Effect of the Restatement on Affected Models by Month Along with the Monthly
                                    Sales of Affected Models

Notes: The black vertical line indicates the ­fuel economy restatement date. Treatment effects on price are on the
left vertical axis; monthly sales of affected models are on the right vertical axis. The standard error for every other
month is shown by the bars and whiskers. Note that the overall ­pre-post treatment effect is statistically significant
          although the monthly treatment effects are noisily estimated.(Table 2),


­create this figure, we interacted                                         with                                     ​1​(Post Restatement)​t​ × 1​(Affected Model)​j​each ­year-month in our sample and plotted the coefficients over time. We see no
discernable evidence of a treatment effect prior to the restatement, but afterward
we observe a decrease in transaction prices      hovers around            for the                                                (that                1 percent)

===== [PDF 第 10 页｜印刷第 216 页] =====
216               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021

affected ­models until January 2014. After this, few treated vehicles are left, and the
treatment effect reverts toward zero. By the end of our sample, the 2014 model year
vehicles would have been selling for almost a year     no 2014 model year vehi-                                                 (notecles are         and very few 2013 model years are left on dealers’ lots.         affected),   Finally, we explore whether the restatement had an appreciable effect on the
unaffected Hyundai and Kia vehicles. One might hypothesize that negative press
relating to the restatement affected all vehicles by the two automakers, including
those unaffected by the restatement. To explore this, we estimate    but replace the                                                               (1)­year-month by make indicators         with                      interacted with                                                         ​μ​t×Mak​e​j​​      ​1​(Hyundai or Kia)​j​­year-month indicators to be able to plot a single effect for the two affected brands.
Figure 2 plots this effect on the unaffected Hyundai and Kia vehicles over time.
We observe a modest upward trend prior to the restatement that continues after the
restatement through the end of 2013.      trend reverses in 2014, but recall that                                (Thevery few affected vehicles were remaining at that       Just after the restatement, it                                                 time.)appears that this trend is slightly amplified, suggesting that the prices of unaffected
Hyundai and Kia vehicles increased somewhat more quickly after the restatement
than would have been expected by the trend—i.e., a temporary, small but positive
price effect. One possible explanation is Hyundai and Kia are ­multiproduct firms
with competing models, so profit maximization could have led to higher prices for
the unaffected vehicles.15 Importantly, there is no evidence of a negative brand
effect.

  Robustness Checks.—Any effects that occur at the overall brand level are con-
trolled for in our primary specification, and in any event, such effects do not appear to
be important in our setting          However, identification could still be compro-                         (Figure 2).mised in other ways. A critical assumption underlying any ­difference-in-difference
analysis is the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption          which requires                                            (SUTVA),that the treatment assignment does not affect the potential outcomes of the ­nontreated
observations             SUTVA can be violated in our context if there are              (­noninterference).16spillovers between the treated and control     from strategic pricing in a market                                                  (e.g.,with differentiated products, either by Hyundai and Kia       by their competi-                                                  and/or     or if there are general equilibrium effects due to the treatment, such as broadertors)effects on the Hyundai and Kia brands. For example, suppose Hyundai and Kia rec-
ognize that demand for the affected vehicles would decrease, leading to an increase
in demand for close substitutes. If the firms are ­profit maximizing, they may find
it beneficial to increase the price of their ­nonaffected close substitutes. This would
imply that our estimated coefficients would be overestimates of the effect of the
restatement on the equilibrium prices       later, as we will see, on the valuation of                                  (andfuel economy, implying that such spillovers to close substitutes would lead to even





    15 As we will discuss later, this could bias our valuation parameter upward, but our robustness checks suggest
such a bias is unlikely.
    16 The classic SUTVA assumptions also require stability in the treatment. In our context, the ­fuel economy rat-
ing changes by different amounts, and thus, our primary results should be interpreted as an average effect.

===== [PDF 第 11 页｜印刷第 217 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        217

                          vehicles  0.02                                 Restatement
          Kia
          and
               0
                       Hyundai

           −0.02                                 unaffected
       on
                    Effect
           −0.04
             2011m7              2012m7              2013m7              2014m7
                                        Year−month


        Figure 2. The Price Effect of the Restatement on Unaffected Hyundai and Kia Vehicles

Notes: The black vertical line indicates the ­fuel economy restatement date. The standard error for every other month
is shown by the bars and whiskers.


greater undervaluation of fuel economy than we        The same situation could                                                 estimate).also occur with close substitutes from other automakers.17
  We thus perform several robustness checks to exploit different sources of vari-
ation to confirm that SUTVA holds in our case. Table 3 presents our first SUTVA
robustness checks by showing the results after excluding close substitute vehicles,
which are the most likely to be affected by strategic pricing.
  Columns 1 and 4 exclude the Hyundai and Kia vehicles that are the closest sub-
stitutes to the restated models but were not subject to a restatement. Close substitute
vehicles are defined as those offered by the same automaker in the same R.L. Polk
vehicle class. Columns 2 and 5 provide an alternative test that excludes the five most
popular close substitutes from other automakers, where we define substitutes across
automakers using data from Edmunds.com and MotorTrend.com.18 Columns 3 and
6 exclude the Hyundai and Kia substitutes as well as the substitutes from other auto-
makers. Removing close substitutes makes little difference to the estimated coef-
ficients in Table 2. The coefficients excluding close substitutes are all close to our
primary specification, indicating that the slight change in the competitive landscape
from the restatement had little influence on the pricing of close substitute models.
   In online Appendix B, we explore alternative sets of fixed effects and find that the
results are robust. These alternative fixed effects slightly change the variation being


    17 In theory, there could also be a secondary response by Hyundai and Kia to the increased prices of close sub-
stitutes, which could perhaps counter the overestimate from the initial response.
   18 Edmunds.com provides a list of other models that consumers considered for each model and model year.
MotorTrend.com explicitly provides a list of the closest competitors. We combined the two lists and then chose the
five ­highest-selling vehicles from the combined list.

===== [PDF 第 12 页｜印刷第 218 页] =====
218               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021


                      Table 3—Robustness Checks for SUTVA Assumption

                                                             logs                           Levels
                                                     (1)      (2)      (3)             (4)      (5)      (6)
​1​(Post Restatement)​t​ × 1​(Affected Model)​j​       −0.011  −0.014  −0.013       −261   −365   −342                                                 (0.004)  (0.003)  (0.003)         (94)     (83)     (84)
­Year-month   class fixed effects                  Yes     Yes     Yes          Yes     Yes     Yes              ​×​­Year-month  make fixed effects                 Yes     Yes     Yes          Yes     Yes     Yes              ​×​VIN10 fixed effects                             Yes     Yes     Yes          Yes     Yes     Yes
DMA fixed effects                             Yes     Yes     Yes          Yes     Yes     Yes
            DMA fixed effects          Yes     Yes     Yes          Yes     Yes     Yes1(Post Restatement) ​×​
Exclude close substitutes of same make            Yes                          Yes
Exclude close substitutes of other makes                   Yes                          Yes
Exclude all close substitutes                                      Yes                          Yes

­R2                                               0.95     0.95     0.95           0.96     0.96     0.96
Observations                                1.50m   1.41m   1.39m        1.50m  1.41m  1.39m

Notes: Dependent  variable  is  log  or  level  of  the  transaction  price           An  observation  is  a                                                                                 (in  dollars).­year-month-DMA-VIN10. VIN10 refers to the VIN prefix, which is a ­trim-engine combination. DMA refers to
a Nielsen Designated Market Area, which is an area covering several counties. Class refers to the vehicle class.
Post Restatement refers to the ­year-month being during or after November 2012. All estimations are weighted by
monthly sales. Standard errors clustered by VIN10.


used to identify our coefficients. Specifically, online Appendix Table B.1 includes
sets of vehicle class fixed effects where we use finer or coarser definitions of vehi-
cle class, which essentially changes how we control for the relative time trends in
the prices of affected and ­nonaffected vehicles. We find that our results are highly
robust to all of these alternative specifications. Online Appendix Table B.2 also adds
­quarter-of-age  make fixed effects to capture the cyclicality in the vehicle market                 ​×​that depends on the time since a vintage of a vehicle was introduced to the market;
this hardly changes the estimates.
  The robustness checks so far confirm that spillover effects to close substitutes
appear to be limited, with relatively small changes in our estimated equilibrium
price response across the checks. In addition to effects on close substitutes, one
might also be concerned that the ­widely publicized restatement had an effect on the
overall Hyundai and Kia brand equity. If the overall brand equity for the two auto-
makers is affected, then the equilibrium prices may be changing due to a diminished
brand perception that affects all Hyundai and Kia models in addition to the response
to the lower ­fuel economy ratings on the affected models. As explained above, our
­year-month   automaker indicator variables assure that we are exploiting variation              ​×​across affected and unaffected vehicles after conditioning on a common price trend
for each automaker, so this concern should not affect our estimates of interest. To
provide further support that this is not a concern, we also estimate the model remov-
ing all other automakers besides Hyundai and Kia so that we are exploiting only
variation within the two automakers across affected and ­nonaffected vehicles. We
again find very similar results. This estimation, along with further robustness checks
on sample selection, can be found in online Appendix Tables B.3 and B.4.
   Finally, we deal with several potential concerns and shed light on the inter-
pretation of the estimates. A key issue is whether car buyers were aware of the

===== [PDF 第 13 页｜印刷第 219 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        219

restatement. This likely changes over time. Those who bought a car soon after the
restatement may have been aware of the actual restatement and even may have seen
the old ratings. As time passes, it becomes increasingly unlikely that car shoppers
know about the restatement; most people started their search after the restatement
had happened, just saw the new ­fuel economy ratings, and never knew they had been
changed.
    It is important for several reasons to establish whether our results are driven by
buyers who were likely aware of the restatement. First, one might be worried about
an unusual selection of car buyers for the affected models just after the restatement.
Presumably this would dissipate for new-car purchases several months later. Second,
it is possible that new-car buyers just after the restatement base their decision                                                                                         (atleast in     on the earlier ratings they had seen prior to the restatement when they        part)compared vehicles in preparation for the purchase, complicating the interpretation
of the price effect. Yet, as more months pass, it becomes increasingly unlikely that
new-car buyers are aware of and basing their decision on the older ratings. Third, as
detailed in Section IVC, the interpretation of the estimates also depends on whether
car buyers were aware of the restatement, as this might impact their beliefs about
and trust in ­fuel economy ratings and realized fuel economy.
  Table 4 presents evidence that our results are not driven by the period shortly
after the restatement. The point estimates do not change much when we omit up
to 12 months following the restatement. The estimates in columns ­2–12 of Table 4
are quite similar to the ­full-sample estimate in column 1. Not surprisingly, stan-
dard errors increase as we shrink the sample. Removing transactions close to the
restatement date ensures that the effect is coming from new-car buyers who were
unlikely to have seen both the pre- and ­postrestatement ­fuel economy ratings—in
other words, they are unlikely to respond to the change in ratings but rather process
the level of the new, lower rating only. This suggests that our results apply more
broadly to settings in which ­fuel economy ratings change without any known issues
of misreporting.

  Heterogeneous  Effects on Transaction Prices.—The  restatement might be
expected to influence the equilibrium pricing decisions of automakers differently
based on the model year of the vehicle and the magnitude of the change in the ­fuel
economy rating. In Table 5, we explore heterogeneous treatment effects with respect
to these variables.19 Columns 1 and 2 replicate our preferred specification from
Table 2. Columns 3 and 4 allow the treatment effect to vary by model year. We see
that the coefficients are generally similar, but the equilibrium price decline for the
­2011–2012 model years                 is somewhat greater than for the 2013 model                         (1.7 percent)year               In levels, the price reductions are $544 and $259, respectively.     (1.1 percent).This difference could be due to differences in supply elasticities     Section IIIB                                                                (seefor         or automakers facing customers with different demand elasticities for    details)the newest model year vehicles.




    19 Online Appendix Tables B.5 and B.6 explore heterogeneity by make and vehicle class.

===== [PDF 第 14 页｜印刷第 220 页] =====
220               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021


    Table 4—Effect on Transaction Prices Excluding the Months Closest to the Restatement

                                              Number of ­post-months excluded

                                    0          1         2          3          4        5                                             (base)
​1​(Post Restatement)​t​                   −0.012   −0.012    −0.013    −0.013    −0.015  −0.016​    × 1​(Affected Model)​j​(logs)              (0.003)   (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)   (0.005)
​1​(Post Restatement)​t​                 −294    −310     −324     −341     −389   −408​    × 1​(Affected Model)​j​(levels)              (91)      (98)       (106)       (115)       (125)     (136)
Observations                          1.52m    1.47m     1.43m     1.38m     1.34m   1.29m

                                              Number of ­post-months excluded

                                       6        7          8          9         10      11
​1​(Post Restatement)​t​                   −0.016   −0.013    −0.012    −0.012    −0.011  −0.010​    × 1​(Affected Model)​j​(logs)              (0.006)   (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.008)   (0.009)
​1​(Post Restatement)​t​                 −415    −368     −347     −364     −330   −320​    × 1​(Affected Model)​j​(levels)             (147)     (158)       (171)       (185)       (204)     (229)
Observations                          1.25m    1.20m     1.16m     1.11m     1.07m   1.02m

­Year-month   class fixed effects            Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes               ​×​­Year-month  make fixed effects            Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes               ​×​VIN10 fixed effects                       Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes
DMA fixed effects                        Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes
            DMA fixed effects     Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes​1​(Post Restatement) ​×​
Notes: Each row and column represents the results from a different regression, for ­24 total. For all regres-
sions, the dependent variable is either the log or level of the transaction price         An observation is a                                                                                     (in dollars).­year-month-DMA-VIN10. VIN10 refers to the VIN prefix, which is a ­trim-engine combination. DMA refers to
a Nielsen Designated Market Area, which is an area covering several counties. Class refers to the vehicle class.
Post Restatement refers to the ­year-month being during or after November 2012. All estimations are weighted by
monthly sales. The ­R2 for all log and level regressions equals 0.­95–0.96. Standard errors clustered by VIN10.



  Columns 5 and 6 allow the treatment effect to vary along with the change in the
­gallons per mile implied by the restatement. We use ­gallons per mile rather than
­miles per gallon because we anticipate that consumers care about total expected
fuel costs, and fuel costs scale linearly with ­gallons per mile.20 The negative coef-
ficient indicates that the price reductions are larger for models that faced a greater
reduction in fuel economy     an increase in fuel        When evaluated at the                                   (i.e.,                     intensity).mean change in ­gallons per mile           the effects are smaller than they are in                                 (0.0019),our preferred specification in columns 3 and 6 of Table 2        and        in logs                                              (−0.006   −$132and       These results suggest that consumers do not respond to the magnitude     levels).of the restatement perfectly proportionately            the mean change in ­gallons                                          (otherwiseper mile should have led to the mean change in       but do respond in the expected                                               price)direction on average.





    20 The results have nearly identical implications if we use ­miles per gallon.

===== [PDF 第 15 页｜印刷第 221 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        221


           Table 5—Heterogeneous Effects of the Restatement on Transaction Prices

                                             Primary           Model year                                                                                 ​Δ​GPM
                                               logs     Levels       logs     Levels      logs      Levels
                                                (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
​1​(Post Restatement)​t​ ​                    −0.012   −294    ​× 1​(Affected Model)​j​                     (0.003)     (91)
​1​(Post Restatement)​t​ ​                                       −0.017   −544    ​× 1 ​(2011–2012 Affected Model)​j​                                (0.006)    (128)
​1​(Post Restatement)​t​ ​                                       −0.011   −259    ​× 1​(2013 Affected Model)​j​                                      (0.004)     (98)
​1​(Post Restatement)​t​ ​                                                         −2.92   −66,544    ​× 1 ​(Affected Model)​j​ × ΔGPM​                                                         (0.90)    (22,470)
­Year-month   class fixed effects              Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes               ​×​­Year-month  make fixed effects             Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes               ​×​VIN10 fixed effects                        Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes
DMA fixed effects                         Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes
            DMA fixed effects      Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes​1​(Post Restatement) ​×​
­R2                                          0.95      0.96        0.95      0.96       0.95       0.96
Observations                           1.52m    1.52m     1.52m    1.52m    1.52m    1.52m

Notes: Dependent  variable  is  log  or  level  of  the  transaction  price           An  observation  is  a                                                                                 (in  dollars).­year-month-DMA-VIN10. VIN10 refers to the VIN prefix, which is a ­trim-engine combination. DMA refers to a
Nielsen Designated Market Area, which is an area covering several counties. Class refers to the vehicle class. Post
Restatement refers to the ­year-month being during or after November 2012.          refers to the change in the                                                       ​Δ𝐺𝑃𝑀​­gallons per mile from the restatement. All estimations are weighted by monthly sales. Standard errors clustered by
VIN10.



                       B. Effects on Other Outcomes

   In equilibrium, it is possible for there to be other adjustments as well. Busse,
Knittel, and Zettelmeyer       show that when gasoline prices change, sales of                       (2013a)new vehicles tend to be affected even more than transaction prices. Such quantity
adjustments are important, since they affect how our estimates translate into the
­willingness to pay for fuel economy and thus our conclusions about undervaluation.
We therefore carefully consider how quantity effects affect our calculations of con-
sumer valuation in Section IV below.
   First, it is important to point out that our setting is quite different from Busse,
Knittel, and Zettelmeyer       By November 2012, automakers had already                         (2013a).completed production of model year 2011 and 2012 vehicles and moved on to pro-
ducing model year 2013 vehicles. All remaining vehicles from model years 2011
and 2012 were already on dealer lots. Thus, it would be physically impossible for
production of this vintage to adjust to the restatement. The only quantity adjustment
possible would be in dealers shifting sales to a later time. But this is likely to be an
unappealing option for dealers because of ­nonnegligible inventory costs from hold-
ing older model year vehicles on the dealer lot.
  Model year 2013 vehicles were still midway through their production cycle at
the time of the restatement. It is certainly possible that Hyundai and Kia could
adjust production of these 2013 vehicles due to the restatement. However, such

===== [PDF 第 16 页｜印刷第 222 页] =====
222               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021

adjustments in production are typically costly, especially in the short run. They
require physical adjustments to assembly lines and renegotiation of contracts with
suppliers. These factors would tend to dampen the response in model year 2013
sales, but even so, we would expect some reduction in sales      a negative elas-                                                                                 (i.e.,       In contrast, supply was very likely inelastic for model year 2011 and 2012ticity).vehicles.
   Estimating the equilibrium effects of the restatement on quantities turns out
to be challenging in our context. In online Appendix C.1, we examine quantity
responses using a specification similar to equation     Automobile sales tend to                                                         (1).be highly idiosyncratic, however, with much ­difficult-to-explain variation occur-
ring month to month as specific models phase in and phase out. As a result, we
obtain very noisy estimates:  all coefficients are positive but imprecisely  esti-
mated. Online Appendix Table C.1 shows that in our preferred specification, the
estimated effect of the restatement on sales is 0.05            error      While                                                    (standard       0.04).we can only take this noisy evidence as suggestive, we do not find clear evi-
dence for a negative equilibrium quantity effect.  Still, our noisy estimates do
not entirely rule out substantial negative quantity effects. Fortunately, we do not
have to take a strong stance on the magnitude of the quantity response for our key
conclusion about substantial undervaluation to hold, as we will show in detail in
Section IVB.
  Besides effects on sales, another possible adjustment in response to the restate-
ment could be to increase advertising expenditures. We examine this in online
Appendix C.2 and find no evidence of changes in either advertising expenditures or
the number of advertisements after the restatement.

                    IV.  Implications for the Valuation of Fuel Economy

                        A. Valuing Fuel Economy

  To understand how consumers value fuel economy, we are interested in how the
discounted present value of future fuel costs influences vehicle purchase decisions.
Going back to Hausman        economists have examined how consumers trade                        (1979),off $1 in up-front purchase costs against $1 in the discounted present value of future
fuel costs. If consumers respond more to a change in up-front cost relative to future
costs, this is taken as evidence of undervaluation of energy efficiency, or what is
often described as myopia.
  Our approach to estimating undervaluation is inspired by Allcott and Wozny
      They start from a discrete choice model of vehicle choice with i.i.d. extreme(2014).value idiosyncratic preferences and invert the equation to arrive at a specification
that regresses the vehicle purchase price on discounted lifetime fuel operating costs
and controls. Our valuation specification is

             ​Pric​e​jrt​ (2)          =  γΔ​G​jt​ + ​ρ​t×Clas​s​j​​ + ​μ​t×Mak​e​j​​ + ​η​r​ × 1​(Post Restatement)​t​ 
                               + ​η​r​ + ​ω​j​ + ​ϵ​jrt​,​

----- 【公式校正｜对照原页图逐式转写，LaTeX】 -----
(2)  Price_{jrt}=\gamma\,\Delta G_{jt}+\rho_{t\times Class_j}+\mu_{t\times Make_j}+\eta_r\times\mathbf 1(\text{Post Restatement})_t+\eta_r+\omega_j+\epsilon_{jrt}
    核对方式：本轮看图；说明：\Delta G_{jt} 为重标引起的贴现生命周期燃油成本变化（非受影响车型与重标前为 0）。销量不调整时 \gamma=-1 为完全估值；表 6（PDF 第 18 页）4% 贴现率下 2011–2012 年款 −0.39、2013 年款 −0.16
----- 【公式校正结束】 -----

===== [PDF 第 17 页｜印刷第 223 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        223

where ​Pric​e​jrt​ is the vehicle transaction price and        is the change in the dis-                                                                                 ​Δ ​G​jt​counted lifetime fuel cost due to the restatement.21 In online Appendix D.1, we
motivate equation   from a random utility model and show that  can be interpreted                  (2)                                                            ​γ​as the valuation parameter, which quantifies how consumers trade off discounted
future energy operating costs with the purchase price.22 If sales do not adjust, we
can interpret a value of    as full valuation—where an increase in expected future               −1fuel costs is entirely reflected by a decrease in the purchase price—but we discuss
the implications of elastic supply in Section IVB.
  There are four empirical challenges to interpreting an estimate of   in equation                                                                                                   ​γ​    as a causal estimate of undervaluation. First, the change in the expected dis-(2)counted future fuel costs      must be constructed based on assumptions about                                         ​Δ ​G​jt​future driving, vehicle survival probabilities, expected future gasoline prices, and
the car buyer’s discount rate. We follow the existing literature in using an exten-
sive set of assumptions to better understand the plausible range of   Second and                                                                                                                                 ​γ​.relatedly,        is potentially subject to measurement error      online Appendix                ​Δ ​G​jt​                                            (seeD.1 for       Our natural experiment helps to overcome some of the measure-         details).ment issues in      because the restatement is perfectly observed. Third, if there is                       ​Δ ​G​jt​a quantity effect, such that sales     thus market        also respond to the restate-                            (and            shares)ment, then  would not be estimating the ­willingness to pay. This is because the                ​γ​­microfoundation of equation      is an inverted market share equation. We discuss                             (2)this in more detail in the next subsection and perform a bounding analysis to show
the influence of quantity effects on our findings. Finally, one may be concerned
about SUTVA, but our robustness checks for our estimation of equation    show                                                                        (1)that SUTVA violations should not be an issue in our setting.
  We first estimate equation    using a baseline set of assumptions in construct-                             (2)ing       expected driving from the NHTSA, vehicle survival probabilities from       ​Δ ​G​jt​:Jacobsen and van Benthem                R.L. Polk            and expected                         (2015) (source:           ­1993–2009),gasoline prices being held constant in real terms at the level at time  ​t​   martingale                                                                     (aassumption, following evidence from Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee       Table 6                                                               2013).presents the results under these baseline assumptions. We show results for different
discount rates, starting with a 1 percent rate in columns 1 and 2 and ending with a
12 percent rate in columns 7 and 8. For each discount rate, the first column presents
the results using the pooled sample, while the second presents the results exploring
heterogeneity in valuation across model years.
  The results show that the equilibrium price changes induced by the restate-
ment correspond to substantial undervaluation of fuel economy: the increase in the


                     to denote that we are focusing on the variation in ​G​jt​ that is coming from the change in fuel   21 We use ​Δ ​G​jt​economy due to the restatement         varies by vehicle        Thus,        is equal to zero for all ­nonaffected                            (which                 model).           ​Δ ​G​jt​models and also equal to zero in the ­prerestatement period for affected vehicles. The only other source of variation
in      could be from changes in expected future gasoline prices at the time of purchase of an affected vehicle. This    ​Δ ​G​jt​variation is modest given that gasoline prices were similar around the time of the restatement, but as a robustness
check, we replace the gasoline price with an average price over the entire period        down this additional                                                                                    (shuttingsource of ­time series         and find similar results       Appendix Table                      variation)                        (online                D.1).   22 Much of the early literature on energy efficiency valuation estimates an implicit discount rate that ratio-
nalizes full valuation, subject to assumptions about many other factors that could influence the valuation of fuel
economy. We follow recent papers      Allcott and Wozny 2014; Sallee, West, and Fan 2016; Grigolon, Reynaert,                                         (e.g.,and Verboven 2018; Leard, Linn, and Zhou        in presenting a valuation parameter conditional on an assumed                                      2017)discount rate      the same set of assumptions about other         This is an expositional choice.            (and                                             factors).

===== [PDF 第 18 页｜印刷第 224 页] =====
224               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021


        Table 6—The Valuation of Fuel Economy Based on the Equilibrium Price Change

                                                                                       ​r    1%​                  ​r    4%​                  ​r    7%​                ​r    12%​                                      =              =              =             = 
                                            (1)     (2)       (3)     (4)       (5)     (6)       (7)     (8)
​1​(ΔLifetime Fuel Costs)​jt​ ​             −0.14          −0.17          −0.20          −0.25    ​× 1​(Affected Model)​j​                  (0.05)            (0.06)            (0.07)            (0.08)
​1​(ΔLifetime Fuel Costs)​jt​ ​                   −0.33          −0.39          −0.46          −0.58​   × 1​(2011–2012 Affected Model)​j​              (0.17)            (0.20)            (0.24)            (0.30)
​1​(ΔLifetime Fuel Costs)​jt​ ​                   −0.13          −0.16          −0.18          −0.23​   × 1​(2013 Affected Model)​j​                     (0.05)            (0.06)            (0.07)            (0.08)
­Year-month   class fixed effects          Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes              ​×​­Year-month  make fixed effects         Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes              ​×​VIN10 fixed effects                    Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes
DMA fixed effects                     Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes
                                     Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes      Yes    Yes​1​(Post Restatement)   DMA fixed effects   ​×​
­R2                                      0.96    0.96     0.96    0.96     0.96    0.96     0.96    0.96
Observations                        1.52m  1.52m   1.52m  1.52m   1.52m  1.52m   1.52m  1.52m

Notes: Dependent variable is the transaction price    nominal         Lifetime fuel costs are computed using                                                       (in           dollars).annual US gasoline prices, survival probabilities from R.L. Polk            and VMT from NHTSA       The                                                             (­1993–2009),                       (2018).results are reported for different discount rates   A coefficient of    implies that a ­$1 increase in lifetime fuel                                                                                    (​r​).           −1costs reduces the transaction price by $1. Values between    and 0 imply that consumers undervalue future fuel                                     −1costs. An observation is a ­year-month-DMA-VIN10. VIN10 refers to the VIN prefix, which is a ­trim-engine combi-
nation. DMA refers to a Nielsen Designated Market Area, which is an area covering several counties. Class refers
to the vehicle class. Post Restatement refers to the ­year-month being during or after November 2012. All estimations
are weighted by monthly sales. Standard errors clustered by VIN10.

expected net present value of future fuel costs implied by the restatement far exceeds
the equilibrium price changes, with the gap even larger for the affected 2013 model
years.23 The result in column 1           discount      implies that consumers are                               (1 percent          rate)indifferent between $1.00 in expected future fuel costs and $0.14 in the up-front
purchase price      a valuation parameter of      The results in column 2 indi-                    (i.e.,                           0.14).cate substantial heterogeneity, with consumers buying the ­2011–2012 model years
             of the affected         having a valuation parameter of 0.33, while(35.4 percent                vehicles)for the 2013 model year, it is 0.13. A natural interpretation of this difference is that
there is considerably less elastic supply for the                2012 model year                                             (already produced)than for the 2013 vintage. Moving to a discount rate of 12 percent, the pooled sam-
ple shows a parameter of 0.25, where the ­2011–2012 model years have a valuation
parameter of 0.58 and the 2013 model year has a parameter of 0.23.
  Our preferred estimates use a middle ground 4 percent discount rate. This gives
a valuation parameter of 0.39 for model years ­2011–2012 and 0.16 for model year
2013. A value of 4 percent falls in the middle of the range of discount rates assumed
in the preferred specifications from other recent studies, which vary from 1.3 per-
cent to 6 percent     Table    In our context, using a relatively low discount rate                 (see       8).appears reasonable because we study ­new-vehicle buyers who are likely not capital
constrained, have access to cheap car loans, and can likely borrow at low rates in
general. The real borrowing rate represents the opportunity costs of the lease or


    23 For the pooled sample, an implicit discount rate of approximately 80 percent would be required to bring
the valuation parameter to one. Put in terms of payback period      metric used most often by           our                                                                    (the                              industry),­pooled-sample result implies a payback period of about three years.

===== [PDF 第 19 页｜印刷第 225 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        225

loan payments for those who lease or finance their ­new-vehicle purchases; for those
who pay cash, this rate is the opportunity cost of not being able to invest in other
investments with a similar ­risk-return tradeoff. This rate was quite low during our
sample period.24
  We cannot emphasize enough that with different sets of assumptions, the under-
valuation parameter would change. For a wide enough range of assumptions, the
valuation parameter can be as low as zero or as high as one. However, we conduct
a fairly exhaustive sensitivity analysis to investigate the robustness of our results in
online Appendix Table D.1 and conclude that, using reasonable sets of assumptions
for constructing       that closely follow the existing literature, these assumptions                          ​Δ ​G​jt​do not change our main result of substantial undervaluation.

                           B. Bounding Analysis

  Conceptual Framework.—Our valuation analysis so far is based entirely on
changes to the equilibrium prices. However, if sales also respond to the restatement,
the parameter   in equation   no longer represents consumers’ ­willingness to pay                    ​γ​           (2)for fuel economy. In this section, we present a simple framework to provide intu-
ition for why the change in ­willingness to pay and the change in equilibrium prices
diverge and illustrate how to calculate the ­willingness to pay in such cases.
  When the supply of vehicles is at least somewhat elastic, such that there are
­nonnegligible quantity effects, the difference between the change in ­willingness to
pay and equilibrium prices depends on the slopes of the supply curve, the                                                                           (residual)demand curve, and the underlying market structure. The panels in Figure 3 illustrate
four possible scenarios for how the supply of vehicles could influence the difference
between the change in ­willingness to pay and prices. In all four, the restatement
shifts demand downward toward the origin, and this vertical shift represents the
change in ­willingness to pay.25 The first three panels provide the intuition under
perfect competition, which is useful to fix ideas and is the common assumption in
the literature      Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer       The fourth panel allows                (e.g.,                              2013a).for imperfect competition.
  We begin with the case of perfectly inelastic supply     a zero quantity                                                                        (i.e.,                  effect).Panel A shows that under perfectly inelastic supply, the change in equilibrium price
         is exactly equal to the change in ­willingness to pay for fuel economy. This(our ​γ​)intuition also holds under imperfect competition, so if we have perfectly inelas-
tic supply, then our results in Table 6 can be interpreted as the ­willingness to pay
regardless of the nature of competition in the market.
  Next, we assume ­upward-sloping supply, which would imply a negative quan-
tity effect from the restatement. This is a standard assumption, even if we find no


                                      report a real borrowing rate of 1.3 percent for the period October 2009 to    24 Leard, Linn, and Zhou (2017)September 2014. Using the same approach as Allcott and Wozny      we find that nominal auto loan rates for                                                              (2014),new vehicles were in the 4 percent range during our sample period        of Governors of the Federal Reserve                                                           (BoardSystem                after accounting for CPI increases of 1.­5–2.1 percent for the period ­2012–2014        ­2010–2013);                                                                                  (IntegratedPublic Use Microdata Series              the real auto loan rate was approximately 2.5 percent. The federal funds                           ­1962–2017),rate in November 2012 was 0.16 percent                                    (Macrotrends 2020).   25 We assume locally parallel shifts in the demand curve, which is supported by the limited role for consumer
selection as discussed in Section IIIA.

===== [PDF 第 20 页｜印刷第 226 页] =====
226               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021


           Panel A. Inelastic supply

                                 P

                                                          Supply

                ∆P               =
              ∆WTP
                           for fuel
                 economy                                                           Demand
                                                                                      pre-                                                     Demand
                                                                                   restatement                                                                             post-
                                                                          restatement


                                                               Q                                    ∆Q
           Panel B. Upward-sloping supply

                                 P

                                                                Supply

              ∆WTP                           for fuel
                 economy      ∆P
                                                           Demand
                                                                                      pre-                                                     Demand
                                                                                   restatement                                                                             post-
                                                                          restatement


                                                               Q                                     ∆Q

                         Figure 3. Interpretation of the Equilibrium Effect
                                                                                            (Continued)


­evidence to support it in our data        we cannot rule it out        Panel B                                (although                        either).shows that under ­upward-sloping supply, the change in equilibrium price under-
estimates the ­willingness to pay for fuel economy. In the next subsection, we will
perform a set of bounding calculations to provide guidance on how one might
adjust the estimates in Table 6 based on different assumptions of the slope of
supply.
  Panel C allows for imperfect competition with an ­upward-sloping supply curve.
When there is imperfect competition, the marginal revenue lies below the residual
demand, allowing firms to earn a markup. Therefore, the change in price when
there is market power will always be greater than the change in price in the com-
petitive market. This means that when we have imperfect competition, the change
in equilibrium price will still be an underestimate of the ­willingness to pay, but not
as much of an underestimate as it would have been under perfect competition. We
will discuss this further in our bounding analysis below. In online Appendix D.3,
we derive the results discussed in this section more formally with a simple analyt-
ical model.

===== [PDF 第 21 页｜印刷第 227 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        227


           Panel C. Market power and upward-sloping supply

                                 P

                                                                Supply

            ∆WTP                       for fuel
               economy ∆Pmpwer
                                   ∆Pcomp
                                                           Demand
                                                                                      pre-                                                     Demand
                                                                                   restatement                                                                             post-
                                     MR  MR    restatement
                                                                  post-  pre-
                                                               restatement
                                                               Q                                                   ∆Qmpwer
           Panel D. Downward-sloping supply

                                 P
                                                       Supply


              ∆WTP                           for fuel
                 economy      ∆P
                                                           Demand
                                                                                      pre-                                                     Demand
                                                                                   restatement                                                                             post-
                                                                          restatement


                                                               Q                                     ∆Q

                   Figure 3. Interpretation of the Equilibrium Effect                                                                  (continued)

Notes: Panels A, B, and D present a particular scenario with respect to the slope of the supply curve and how it
impacts the interpretation of the equilibrium price effect under competitive pricing. Panel C compares the change
in equilibrium price for the competitive case versus the market power case.


   Finally, panel D assumes the less likely case of ­downward-sloping supply under
perfect competition.26 We cover this case for completeness, as it is consistent with
our positive        not statistically            point estimate of the quantity effect           (though                 significant)from the restatement. Localized economies of scale are one possible economic
­justification for ­downward-sloping supply, but we recognize that this would be atyp-
ical. In this scenario, the change in equilibrium price overestimates the ­willingness
to pay. This would suggest that our estimates in Table 6 are biased upward and that
the true ­willingness to pay is even closer to zero.

  Bounds on the Valuation of Fuel Economy.—We can use the theoretical obser-
vations about the influence of a quantity effect on our valuation parameter to


    26 The case of ­downward-sloping supply is more complicated under imperfect competition, and the bias from
ignoring imperfect competition could go either way depending on the relative slopes of the supply and demand
curves.

===== [PDF 第 22 页｜印刷第 228 页] =====
228               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021

inform a simple bounding analysis. We begin with the implications of upward- or
­downward-sloping supply while assuming perfect competition. Recall that in online
Appendix Table C.1, we found noisy estimates for the effect of the restatement on
sales, with a slightly positive point estimate of 0.05           error     As this                                                   (standard       0.04).cannot rule out either a positive or negative quantity effect, we use a wide range of
values for what the quantity effect might be. If we assume standard ­upward-sloping
supply, as in panel B of Figure 3, then we should see a negative quantity effect.
We examine quantity effects down to            For context, since we found a                                     −5 percent.precisely estimated price effect of            a            quantity effect would                                 −1 percent,  −5 percentbe quite large relative to the price effect. If we assume economies of scale are such
a dominant force that they induce a ­downward-sloping supply curve, as in panel
C, then we should see a positive quantity effect. We examine quantity effects up to
+5 percent.  To estimate ­willingness to pay, we further have to assume a price elasticity of
demand.27 Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes        find vehicle-­model-level ­own-price                                    (1995)demand elasticities ranging to      while Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer                           −6.5,                                  (2013a)consider demand elasticities that range from     to      in part based on Berry,                             −2   −5,Levinsohn, and Pakes’        estimates but at a higher level of ­vehicle model aggre-                    (1995)gation. Hyundai and Kia are in the smaller car segment of the market, so one might
expect more elastic demand, which would suggest a number closer to    Moreover,                                                      −6.our data are highly disaggregated; an observation  is even more detailed than
­make-model-trim-vintage          thus affording ample opportunities for consum-                      (VIN10),ers to substitute to a similar vehicle, leading to more elastic demand. Accordingly,
we first calculate our estimates using a demand elasticity of     but we also per-                                                 −6,form the analysis using a smaller estimate of   We also need to assume an aver-                                    −4.age vehicle price ­prerestatement, and for this, we use $24,500       is calculated as                                                                     (this             for consistency with our main results in Table 2; it is also reasonably$294/0.012closely aligned with the summary statistics on vehicle prices for Hyundai and Kia
in Table         1).28  Using these assumptions, the adjustment formulas in online Appendix D.3, and
the $294 reduction in equilibrium price due to the restatement, Table 7 shows that
for a 5 percent reduction in quantity, the ­willingness to pay is $498 when using
a demand elasticity of    and $600 when using an elasticity of             per-               −6                         −4 (underfect            The latter is roughly a doubling of the estimated equilibrium     competition).price change. Conceptually, we are just moving along the demand curve by the
percentage change in quantity. For smaller quantity effects—e.g., in the                                                                −1 percentrange—a $294 reduction in equilibrium price translates in a ­willingness to pay of
$335        the             which is a much tighter bound. If we assume a     (under   −6 elasticity),                                                   (less                   quantity effect, then the $294 reduction in equilibrium price cor-likely) +5 percentresponds to a ­willingness to pay of only $90 when using a demand elasticity of                                                  −6and is even below 0 when using a demand elasticity of     Overall, these illustrative                                          −4.



    27 In online Appendix D.3, we show how to translate a given change in the equilibrium price into a change in
­willingness to pay using demand and supply elasticities alone under common assumptions.
    28 Note that when we use a lower ­prerestatement price, such as $20,000, the range of results narrows substantially.

===== [PDF 第 23 页｜印刷第 229 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        229


       Table 7—Interpretation of Equilibrium Change in Prices with Respect to Different
                                       Supply Curves

         Quantity effect                   ­Willingness to Pay                     ­Willingness to Pay                                                             ($)                                   ($)
       (%)                                                          ​η​D​= −6                                                ​η​D​= −4
                                          498                            600      −5                                          335                            355      −1        0                                 294                            294
        1                                 253                            233
        5                                  90                                                             −12
         Notes: The table shows how a given equilibrium change in price translates into ­willingness to
        pay for fuel economy        perfect                   refers to the price elasticity of demand that                            (under        competition). ​η​D​      we use in our calculations. For all rows, we use an equilibrium change in transaction prices of
        $294, following our primary results. These illustrative calculations are also based on an average
          ­prerestatement price of $24,500.




calculations suggest that the estimated valuation parameters could be either twice as
large or close to zero for these particular quantity effects.
   If imperfect competition is at play but we calculate the ­willingness to pay for
fuel economy assuming perfect competition, the results with ­upward-sloping supply
would be biased upward, since the change in price is not as much of an underestimate
of the ­willingness to pay. Thus, the results in Table 7 showing the ­willingness to pay
for quantity effects of          and           should be seen as upper bounds.                    −5 percent    −1 percentThese upper bounds indicate that with even a large quantity effect of                                                                −5 percent         is not justified by our       the ­willingness to pay should be no more than(which                        data),double the equilibrium price change.
  Combined with Table 6, the results in Table 7 demonstrate that our main conclu-
sions about substantial undervaluation hold up to a wide range of quantity effects.
For instance, consider the pooled sample and a 12 percent discount rate in Table 6.
Further, suppose that the supply curve is highly elastic such that it translates to a
doubling of the valuation parameter from 0.25 to 0.50. For our preferred 4 per-
cent discount rate, a doubling of the valuation parameter corresponds to an adjusted
value of 0.34. For the valuation parameter for the 2011 and 2012 model years, a dou-
bling of the estimate would yield a value of 0.78. Of course, for those model years, a
highly elastic supply is very unlikely.29 Assuming a supply elasticity closer to zero,
the effect on the valuation parameter should be much more modest. In Table 7, a
quantity effect of            leads to an underestimate of the ­willingness to pay of                −1 percentonly 12 percent using a demand elasticity of                as                             −6 (calculated   (­294 − 334)/334)or 17 percent using a demand elasticity of    When applied to the model years                                   −4.2011 and 2012, the valuation of fuel economy falls below 0.5, suggesting substantial
undervaluation.





    29 As discussed earlier, the supply for model years 2011 and 2012 should be inelastic given the impossibility of
adjusting the production of a model year that has finished its production cycle and the high costs of holding vehicles
in inventory on the dealer lot.

----- 【公式校正｜对照原页图逐式转写，LaTeX】 -----
（表 7 的换算，派生）  \Delta WTP=\Delta P-P_0\,\frac{\Delta Q/Q}{\eta_D},\qquad \Delta P=-294,\ P_0=24{,}500
    核对方式：派生 [D]；说明：期刊正文未印此式（原式在本地没有的在线附录 D.3）。该式由表 7 六个格子反推，能复现 498/600、335/355、90/−12（表中报的是 -\Delta WTP）；它与 NBER 工作论文版脚注 26 的 \Delta P+\Delta P\times\Delta Q/\eta_D 不同，后者见 A14b
----- 【公式校正结束】 -----

===== [PDF 第 24 页｜印刷第 230 页] =====
230               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021


                    Table 8—Comparison of Estimates with Other Studies

         Studies using exact valuation parameter                      r             valuation parameter

          Sallee, West, and Fan                       5%                  1.01                            (2016)         Allcott and Wozny                         6%                  0.76                         (2014)      Own estimate from restatement                 5%                                                                                              [0.­17–0.42]      Own estimate from restatement                 6%                                                                                              [0.­18–0.44]
         Studies using approximate valuation parameter

         Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer                 6%                  1.33                                     (2013a)         Grigolon, Reynaert, and Verboven               6%                  0.91                                       (2018)         Leard, Linn, and Zhou                            1.3%                 0.54                             (2017)         Leard, Linn, and Springel                             2.­9–5.3%              0.­06–0.76                               (2019)      Own estimate from restatement                 6%                                                                                              [0.­40–1.01]      Own estimate from restatement                     1.3%                                                                                              [0.­31–0.77]
         Notes: For our own estimates, we report a range that highlights the heterogeneity of model years
        ­2011–2012 versus 2013. The lower value of the range represents the valuation parameter for
        model years ­2011–2012. The upper value corresponds to model year 2013.

                    C. Comparison to Previous Literature

  Table 8 summarizes the range of our results along with several notable papers
that perform a similar valuation exercise. The table divides studies into those esti-
mating an exact valuation parameter or an approximate valuation parameter, a
distinction we discuss further below. The valuation parameters in Busse, Knittel,
and Zettelmeyer           Sallee, West, and Fan        and Grigolon, Reynaert,                (2013a);                      (2016);and Verboven        are all close to one, which implies ­near-full valuation. Allcott             (2018)and Wozny       and Leard, Linn, and Zhou         find parameters consistent           (2014)                          (2017)with undervaluation; our estimates are even lower. Our estimates, however, align
with the heterogeneous estimates of Leard, Linn, and Springel       which range                                                           (2019),from 0.06 to 0.76 but are below 0.30 for most demographic groups. Interestingly,
our estimates also align with automakers’ beliefs about how consumers value fuel
economy. For instance, our valuation estimate of 0.39 corresponds to a payback time
of a little less than 3 years, where payback time is defined as the number of years
that consumers fully value fuel economy, after which they do not value it at all.
Automakers report that their planning decisions are based on an assumed consumer
payback time of one to four years. This finding is based on years of focus groups
with potential car buyers and other market research          Research Council                                                    (National2015, McAlinden et al.         That the payback time implied by our results is                       2016).30similar to the payback time reported by automakers is striking but is not, of course,
direct evidence that either our results or the automakers’ assumptions are correct.

         D. Possible Explanations for Our Lower Valuation Estimates

  There are several possible explanations for why our estimates are lower than most
others. Broadly speaking, the explanations fall into three categories: differences in
empirical setting, in the variation being used, and in methodology.


                                                  who find a required payback period of two    30 This estimate is also consistent with Allcott and Knittel (2019),years or less using ­stated-preference survey data.

===== [PDF 第 25 页｜印刷第 231 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        231

   Differences in Empirical Setting.—The focus of our analysis is on new cars from
Hyundai and Kia during the period 2011 to 2014. Several of the other studies pro-
vide estimates from different markets and time frames.
  Some of the recent studies estimate the valuation parameter for used-car buyers.
For example, Sallee, West, and Fan        estimate their model on data from used-                                (2016)car auctions. Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer        use estimates based on both                                         (2013a)the new- and used-vehicle markets. But our study is not the only one focusing on new
cars      Grigolon, Reynaert, and Verboven 2018; Leard, Linn, and Zhou      (e.g.,                                                             2017).However, Grigolon, Reynaert, and Verboven        use data from the European                                         (2018)automobile market, which differs from the market in the United States.
   Also, our analysis is based primarily on Hyundai and Kia new-car buyers, and
it is possible that these buyers are different from other new-car buyers. On the one
hand, it seems likely that Hyundai and Kia, which are known for smaller, more
­fuel-efficient cars, draw a segment of buyers that are more attentive to fuel economy
and value fuel economy more than average. On the other hand, these car buyers may
also be ­lower-income households who are more prone to steeply discount future fuel
costs        Linn, and Springel     (Leard,                  2019).  Our sample period also differs somewhat from previous work. Some of the earlier
papers use data covering a time period that ends before ours begins. Our data start
in 2011, when the economy was still in a slow climb out from the Great Recession.
Interest rates were very low, and gasoline prices were generally low. It is possible
that ­fuel economy undervaluation may vary over time and economic conditions, but
studying this issue in more detail would require a long time series of restatement
events.

   Differences in Identifying Variation.—One major difference is that our study is
the first to use variation from a natural experiment that exogenously changed ­fuel
economy ratings; most previous studies leverage changes in gasoline prices. This
feature of our analysis is useful, as it assures that other vehicle attributes are held
constant, and it leverages exogenous variation in the fuel economy ratings, which is
highly relevant for understanding the consumer response to ­fuel economy standards.
Using variation from the ­fuel economy rating restatement could affect the interpre-
tation of our results in several ways, which we discuss in this section.
   First, it is important to consider how variation in the ­fuel economy rating influ-
ences new-car buyers’ beliefs about future fuel costs. New-car buyers likely form
their beliefs about the future fuel costs of each potential vehicle choice using a
variety of sources of information. The ­fuel economy ratings are likely to be the
most important source for most consumers, as they are widely recognized, on all
­car-comparison websites, and displayed prominently on the label on each new car
in the dealer lot. But it is also likely that at least some consumers draw upon other
sources of information, including conversations with other car owners, advertise-
ments, or their own past experiences with vehicles of similar attributes. Our study
exogenously changes only the ­fuel economy ratings, leaving other sources of infor-
mation unchanged.
  How might this affect the interpretation of our results? There are a few possi-
bilities. As a starting point, it is useful to note that survey evidence from multiple

===== [PDF 第 26 页｜印刷第 232 页] =====
232               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021

studies suggests that consumer beliefs about future fuel costs—based on all existing
information—on average are close to unbiased when using the official fuel economy
ratings        2013, Allcott and Knittel 2019, Andor et al.       This evidence        (Allcott                                           2020).suggests that it is unlikely that there is some general set of biased beliefs about
future fuel costs.
  However, there is the possibility that at least some of the new-car buyers prior to
the restatement were already aware that the affected vehicle ratings were incorrect
and thus already incorporated this information into their ­car-buying decision pro-
cess. Should this be the case, our estimation would understate the price effect and
thus understate the valuation of fuel economy. However, for it to be the case, the
new-car buyers would have to have known exactly which vehicles were affected and
unaffected by the restatement. This seems unlikely to us. The restatement came as
a complete surprise to the automotive community—we could find no articles in the
mainstream media or trade press about it prior to November 2012. That said, it is
possible that new-car buyers had another source of information that somehow told
them the true fuel economy of the affected vehicles. We explored this possibility
extensively by looking for information that was available prior to the restatement
that would support it. We did find blog posts by automobile aficionados prior to the
restatement that indicated that they were having a hard time achieving the rated fuel
economy, but this is also true for many other models that were not affected by the
restatement, including other unaffected Hyundai and Kia models. The reason for
these common complaints is that individual driving behavior also influences fuel
economy, so there is heterogeneity in the actual ­on-road fuel economy achieved.
Thus, while we cannot rule out some other source of information that informed new-
car buyers about the true fuel economy of the affected Hyundai and Kia vehicles, we
found no evidence to support this hypothesis.
    It is also possible that new-car buyers after the restatement bring in other infor-
mation from prior to the restatement. For example, consumers may still remember
advertisements describing the high fuel economy of some of the Hyundai and Kia
affected vehicles from prior to the restatement and may not fully update their prior
beliefs after the restatement. If this were the case, we would expect new-car buyers
to update their beliefs over time, which would suggest that our valuation parameter
would increase over time as consumers more fully adjust. However, in Table 4, we
find that if we exclude car buyers in the months just after the restatement    up to                                                                             (forone year in        our estimates are only modestly affected. The fact that we do             length),not see a change in the valuation parameter over time since the restatement suggests
that belief updating would have to be very slow in order for prior information to be
a major explanation for our results.31
  Even so, the results in Table 4 do not completely rule out an extremely slow
updating of beliefs about fuel economy. If that were the case, our results would
directly apply to the first few years after ­fuel economy standards are tightened, as
eventually consumers would correctly update. However, if ­fuel economy standards


    31 In reality, we believe it is most likely that most new-car buyers after the restatement started their search well
after the restatement occurred and only saw the newer, lower ­fuel economy rating on car-comparison websites, so
they very well could be unaware that that the rating had changed at all.

===== [PDF 第 27 页｜印刷第 233 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        233

continue to be tightened ­year on year, our results would continue to apply for the
further increases in the standards. It is also useful to recognize that if new-car
buyers are slow to update their beliefs about fuel economy, we might expect the
same new-car buyers to be slow to update their beliefs about future gasoline prices
when current gasoline prices change. If so, then the results from most of the pre-
vious studies would also only be useful for understanding ­medium-run consumer
responses.
  Second, a closely related issue is lack of trust in ­fuel economy ratings. It is possible
that the restatement itself had an impact on consumers’ overall trust and ­willingness
to rely on the official ratings. Because our empirical strategy compares affected
vehicles to unaffected ones, for a change in trust to change the interpretation of our
valuation parameter, there would need to be an asymmetric change in trust between
the affected and unaffected vehicles.32 Note that we do not need to assume full trust
in the ratings for our identification strategy to work. For example, mistrust does not
affect our estimates if consumers on average uniformly discount all ratings, but trust
changes in ratings. Since our specification is based on changes in ­gallons per mile,
this particular type of mistrust does not affect our estimates. If instead consumers
on average do not trust a change in the ­fuel economy ratings      the change is two                                                                      (e.g.,­miles per gallon, but consumers believe that the change was one ­mile per                                                                              gallon),this would constitute another type of biased beliefs. We view this as unlikely because
new-car buyers would have to do substantial research to determine which models
and trims received an updated rating. When new-car buyers go to a car-comparison
website or the dealership, there would be no indication of the restatement, only the
new numbers for the fuel economy of the affected vehicles. Should it be the case, it
could be another mechanism for why we observe undervaluation of fuel economy.
Note that when ­fuel economy standards are increased, the government adjusts the
official ratings. Thus, biased beliefs about what changes in ratings imply for future
fuel costs that lead to undervaluation        due to other sources of information                                   (perhapsthat influence the decision        would have direct relevance to policy.                          process)   Third, by using variation in ­fuel economy ratings, we may be capturing aspects
of human behavior not captured in previous studies that use gasoline price variation.
As suggested in survey evidence in Allcott             it is possible that for at least                                          (2013),some consumers, when they compare pairs of similar vehicles, they ­miscategorize
them as having exactly the same fuel economy, but when evaluating across vehicle
pairs with very different ­fuel economy ratings       in different vehicle                                                        (e.g.,                       classes),they perceive a difference in fuel economy. Should this be true, it might imply that
consumers undervalue fuel economy for small changes in ratings but come closer to
correctly valuing fuel economy for larger changes. Our empirical analysis is based
on relatively small changes in fuel economy      one to six ­miles per gallon, but                                       (from

    32 For example, if consumers believe that ratings for all vehicles were off by a fixed amount in ­miles per gallon
        speaking, ­gallons per mile, but we ignore this          our estimate should be unaffected. To see this,(strictly                                                   subtlety),consider the case where consumers believe that every rating is three ­miles per gallon too high. They would still
correctly interpret a change from 25 to 23 ­miles per gallon as a 2 ­miles per gallon change, even if they believe the
true fuel economy went from 22 to 20 ­miles per gallon. Alternatively, car buyers might believe that all ratings are
overstated by a fixed percentage. In that case, consumers should anticipate a larger change in discounted fuel costs
than is predicted by the change in EPA ratings, which would imply that our—already low—estimate of undervalu-
ation is too high.

===== [PDF 第 28 页｜印刷第 234 页] =====
234               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021

with most restatements around one to three ­miles per       These relatively small                                                       gallon).changes in fuel economy are especially useful for understanding ­fuel economy stan-
dards because they are in the order of magnitude of recent ­year-over-year increases
in standards in the United States. In other words, for policy relevance, we are most
interested in the consumer response to such changes.
   In summary, by using variation in ­fuel economy ratings, the interpretation of our
coefficients may differ from those in studies primarily using gasoline price variation.
By focusing on variation in ­fuel economy ratings, we capture aspects of behavior
that previous estimates using gasoline price variation do not. We cannot differentiate
between several different possible behavioral explanations for our undervaluation
result, including inattention to ­fuel economy ratings, a lack of sophistication in pro-
cessing ­fuel economy information, large cognitive costs in considering future fuel
expenditures, and incorrect beliefs, but all of these would have policy relevance.

   Differences in Methodology.—A final potential explanation for why our esti-
mates differ is the approach used to estimate the valuation parameter. Some papers,
such as Sallee, West, and Fan       and Allcott and Wozny         estimate the                           (2016)                       (2014),parameter directly, just as in our equation     Others approximate the parameter                                               (2).by separately estimating the average change in equilibrium prices and the average
change in discounted future fuel costs, then dividing the first by the second. In the
­closely related context of appliances, Houde and Myers        point out that this                                                   (2019)approximation is likely to provide a biased estimate of the true valuation parameter.
The intuition is that the ratio of the means of two variables    in the                                                          (as      approximation)is usually not the same as the mean of their ratio     estimate of   in equation                                                  (the                 ​γ​            (2))if these variables are heterogeneous and correlated. Online Appendix D.4 illustrates
the issue mathematically and provides a conceptual example.
  Our results suggest that this approximation bias may be large in the context of
­fuel economy valuation. In Table 8, we divide up the recent studies based on the
approach taken. We also provide our own estimates using the same discount rates
used in the previous studies and show how the approximation impacts the valuation
parameters for model years ­2011–2012 versus 2013. To compute the approximated
valuation parameter, we divide the estimated change in the equilibrium vehicle price
in levels         by the ­sales-weighted change in discounted future fuel costs         (Table 2)implied by the restatement.
  Our estimates are below 0.5 when we estimate the exact valuation parameter,
suggesting much more substantial undervaluation than does previous work. When
we use the approximation, we find much greater valuation of fuel economy, with
upper-bound estimates near one, as in several previous papers. Thus, the choice
between exact and approximated valuation parameter is consequential in our empir-
ical application—it more than doubles the estimate of the valuation parameter. The
approximation bias is large enough to significantly alter the main conclusions from
the analysis, potentially leading the researcher to incorrectly conclude that consum-
ers do not undervalue future fuel savings. In addition, our results suggest that some
of the findings of ­nearly full valuation of fuel economy in the literature may suffer
from upward bias due to this approximation, although the magnitude of the bias
could differ across studies.

===== [PDF 第 29 页｜印刷第 235 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        235

                                          V.  Conclusions

  This paper exploits an unexpected restatement in the ­EPA-rated fuel economy for
over one million vehicles. A highly desirable feature of this natural experiment is
that the vehicles themselves are identical before and after the restatement, providing
us with a source of exogeneous variation in future fuel costs expected by consumers.
The restatement reduces equilibrium prices by 1.2 percent, or just under $300. This
variation allows us to estimate the valuation of future fuel costs through a valuation
parameter that captures how consumers weigh future fuel costs against the up-front
purchase price.
   In our preferred set of estimates, we find that consumers are indifferent between
$1.00 in discounted future gasoline costs and ­$0.16–0.39 in the vehicle purchase
price, where the higher estimate is when we restrict the sample to ­2011–2012 model
year vehicles. This result suggests that consumers undervalue future fuel savings
when they purchase new vehicles. We further perform an extensive sensitivity anal-
ysis to show that even under a wide range of assumptions about factors such as con-
sumer expectations, discounting, and expected future driving, we continue to find
undervaluation. We also perform a bounding analysis using different assumptions
about supply elasticities, demand elasticities, and market structure to illustrate that
substantial undervaluation persists for very broad ranges of assumptions.
  Such undervaluation of fuel economy could come about from a mix of behavioral
factors such as            inattention, lack of salience of fuel economy, or present                 (rational)bias in the vehicle purchasing decision. We cannot disentangle these factors, but
from a policy perspective, it is crucial to know whether and to what extent consum-
ers are undervaluing fuel economy. Our finding is consistent with ­long-standing
beliefs in the automobile industry, but it differs from some—but not all—of the
recent literature. Our analysis highlights that our results differ less after accounting
for whether the study estimates the exact valuation parameter or an approximation.
But other factors may also make a difference, including the empirical setting and the
variation being exploited.
  We emphasize that our results are the first in the literature to use a natural exper-
iment that actually changes ­EPA-rated fuel economy, and thus, we believe that they
provide valuable guidance to policymakers who are attempting to better understand
the costs and benefits of ­fuel economy standards. We suspect that similar policy
considerations carry over to other settings. For example, the presence of behavioral
biases in valuing important attributes might apply more generally to contexts with
products that have ­back-loaded costs or benefits, such as solar panels, energy effi-
ciency upgrades, health care plans, and retirement savings, among many others.

                        REFERENCES

Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber. 2011. “Choice Inconsistencies Among the Elderly: Evidence
   from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program.” American Economic Review 101    ­1180–210.                                                                                            (4):Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber. 2016. “Evolving Choice Inconsistencies  in Choice of
    ­Prescription Drug Insurance.” American Economic Review 106    2145–84.                                                                       (8):Allcott, Hunt. 2013. “The Welfare Effects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and Calibrations from
   the Automobile Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5    30–66.                                                                                   (3):

===== [PDF 第 30 页｜印刷第 236 页] =====
236               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021


Allcott, Hunt, and Michael Greenstone. 2012. “Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?” Journal of
   ­Economic Perspectives 26    3–28.                                (1):Allcott, Hunt, and Christopher Knittel. 2019. “Are Consumers Poorly Informed about Fuel Economy?
   Evidence from Two Experiments.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11    1–37.                                                                                               (1):Allcott, Hunt, and Nathan Wozny. 2014. “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox.”
   Review of Economics and Statistics 96    779–95.                                             (5):Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee. 2013. “What Do Consumers Believe about
   Future Gasoline Prices.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 66    383–403.                                                                                             (3):Andor, Mark A., Andreas Gerster, Kenneth T. Gillingham, and Marco Horvath. 2020. “Running a Car
   Costs Much More Than People Think.” Nature 580: 453–55.
Bento, Antonio M., Kenneth Gillingham, Mark R. Jacobsen, Christopher R. Knittel, Benjamin Leard,
   Joshua Linn, Virginia McConnell, et al. 2018. “Flawed Analyses of U.S. Auto Fuel Economy Stan-
   dards.” Science 362       1119–21.                      (6419):Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium.”
   Econometrica 63    841–90.                      (4):Bertrand, Marianne, and Adair Morse. 2011. “Information Disclosure, Cognitive Biases, and Payday
   Borrowing.” Journal of Finance 66    1865–93.                                         (6):Bhargava, Saurabh, and Dayanand Manoli. 2015. “Psychological Frictions and the Incomplete
   Take-Up of Social Benefits: Evidence from an IRS Field Experiment.” American Economic Review
   105     3489–529.        (11):Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2010–2013. “2013 Survey of Consumer Finances.”
   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/
   scf_2013.htm         on August 29,                (accessed              2020).Bowman, Zach. 2012. “Hyundai, Kia Admit Exaggerated Mileage Claims, Will Compensate Owners.”
   AutoBlog, November  2. https://www.autoblog.com/2012/11/02/hyundai-kia-admit-exaggerated-
   mileage-claims-will-compensate-o/.
Bruce, Chris. 2014. “Hyundai-Kia Fuel Economy Errors Trigger $300M in Federal Penalties.”
   ­AutoBlog, November  3.  https://www.autoblog.com/2014/11/03/hyundai-kia-300-million-mpg-
    penalties/.
Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013a. “Are Consumers ­Myopic?
   Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.” American Economic Review 103    220–56.                                                                                         (1):Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013b. “Data for: Are Consumers
   Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.” American Economic Review. https://www.
   openicpsr.org/openicpsr/project/112589/version/V1/view.
Chavis, Larry, and Phillip Leslie. 2009. “Consumer Boycotts: The Impact of the Iraq War on French
   Wine Sales in the U.S.” Quantitative Marketing and Economics 7    37–67.                                                                          (1):Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.”
   American Economic Review 99    1145–77.                                     (4):DataOne. 2011–2014. “VIN Decoding Data.” Unpublished data         on June 30,                                                            (accessed            2020).Davenport, Coral. 2018. “Trump Administration Unveils Its Plan to Relax Car Pollution Rules.”
  New York Times, August 2. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/02/climate/trump-auto-emissions-
   california.html.
Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retire-
   ment Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
   118    815–42.        (3):Dupas, Pascaline. 2011. “Do Teenagers Respond to HIV Risk Information? Evidence from a Field
   Experiment in Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3    1–34.                                                                                    (1):Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard Newell, and Karen Palmer. 2009. “Energy Efficiency Economics and
   Policy.” Annual Review of Resource Economics 1: 597–620.
Gillingham, Kenneth T., Sébastien Houde, and Arthur A. van Benthem. 2021. “Replication data
    for: Consumer Myopia in Vehicle Purchases: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” American
   ­Economic Association              Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research                            [publisher],               https://doi.org/10.38886/E120306V1.    [distributor].Goda, Gopi Shah, Colleen Flaherty Manchester, and Aaron J. Sojourner. 2014. “What Will My
   Account Really Be Worth? Experimental Evidence on How Retirement Income Projections Affect
   Saving.” Journal of Public Economics 119: 80–92.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou. 1998. “The Effects of the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency Standards
   in the US.” Journal of Industrial Economics 46    1–33.                                                      (1):

===== [PDF 第 31 页｜印刷第 237 页] =====
VOL. 13 NO. 3        GILLINGHAM ET AL.: CONSUMER MYOPIA IN VEHICLE PURCHASES        237


Grigolon, Laura, Mathias Reynaert, and Frank Verboven. 2018. “Consumer Valuation of Fuel Costs
   and Tax Policy: Evidence from the European Car Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic
   Policy 10    193–225.              (3):Hausman, Jerry A. 1979. “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of ­Energy-Using
   Durables.” Bell Journal of Economics 10    33–54.                                                (1):Hendel, Igal, Saul Lach, and Yossi Spiegel. 2017. “Consumers’ Activism: The Cottage Cheese Boy-
    cott.” RAND Journal of Economics 48    972–1003.                                             (4):Houde, Sébastien, and Erica Myers. 2019. “Heterogeneous       Perceptions of Energy Costs: Impli-                                                      (Mis-)   cations for Measurement and Policy Design.” NBER Working Paper 25722.
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS). 1962–2017. “Note on Adjusting Dollar Amount
   Variables for Inflation          United States Department of Labor. https://cps.ipums.org/cps/                         (CPI-U).”   cpi99.shtml         on September 2,               (accessed                2019).Jacobsen, Mark R., and Arthur A. van Benthem. 2015. “Vehicle Scrappage and Gasoline Policy.”
   American Economic Review 105    1312–38.                                       (3):Jensen, Robert. 2010. “The             Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling.”                             (Perceived)   ­Quarterly Journal of Economics 125    515–48.                                           (2):Jessoe, Katrina, and David Rapson. 2014. “Knowledge Is       Power: Experimental Evidence from                                                       (Less)   Residential Energy Use.” American Economic Review 104    1417–38.                                                                  (4):Kahn, James A. 1986. “Gasoline Prices and the Used Automobile Market: A Rational Expectations
   Asset Price Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 101    323–40.                                                                     (2):Kia Motors America, Inc. 2020. “Kia MPG Information: Compensation.” https://ksupport.kiausa.com/
   ConsumerAffairs/KiaMPGInfo          June 23,                                 (accessed         2015).Lacetera, Nicola, Devin G. Pope, and Justin R. Sydnor. 2012. “Heuristic Thinking and Limited Atten-
   tion in the Car Market.” American Economic Review 102    2206–36.                                                                 (5):Leard, Benjamin, Joshua Linn, and Katalin Springel. 2019. “Pass-Through and Welfare Effects of
   Regulations that Affect Product Attributes.” https://media.rff.org/documents/WP_19-07_Leard_
   rev.pdf.
Leard, Benjamin, Joshua Linn, and Yichen Christy Zhou. 2017. “How Much Do Consumers Value
   Fuel Economy and Performance? Evidence from Technology Adoption.” https://www.aeaweb.org/
   conference/2018/preliminary/paper/S3eaQRsE.
Macrotrends. 2020. “Federal Funds Rate - 62 Year Historical Chart.” Macrotrends. https://www.
   macrotrends.net/2015/fed-funds-rate-historical-chart         on August 29,                                                     (accessed              2020).McAlinden, Sean P., Yen Chen, Michael Schultz, and David J. Andrea. 2016. The Potential Effects of
   the 2017–2025 EPA/NHTSA         Economy Mandates on the U.S. Economy. Ann Arbor, MI:                       GHG/Fuel   Center for Automotive Research.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 2018. “Average Vehicle Miles Traveled.” https://www.
   nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.dot.gov/files/documents/ld_cafe_co2_nhtsa_2127-al76_epa_pria_181016.
   pdf         on August 27,       (accessed              2020).National Research Council. 2015. Cost, Effectiveness, and Deployment of Fuel Economy Technologies
   for Light-Duty Vehicles. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Parry, Ian W.H., and Kenneth A. Small. 2005. “Does Britain or the United States Have the Right Gas-
   oline Tax?” American Economic Review 95    1276–89.                                                  (4):Parry, Ian W.H., Margaret Walls, and Winston Harrington. 2007. “Automobile Externalities and Pol-
    icies.” Journal of Economic Literature 45    374–99.                                                (2):Polk, R.L. 1993–2009. “Data on Vehicles in Operation.” unpublished data         on July 30,                                                                    (accessed           2019).Polk, R.L. 2011–2014. “Data on All Dealer-Reported U.S. New Vehicle Transactions.” unpublished
   data         on October 13,        (accessed               2016).Sallee, James M., Sarah E. West, and Wei Fan. 2016. “Do Consumers Recognize the Value of Fuel
  Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations.” Journal of Public
   Economics 135: 61–73.
Tadelis, Steven, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2015. “Information Disclosure as a Matching Mechanism:
   Theory and Evidence from a Field Experiment.” American Economic Review 105    886–905.                                                                                           (2):US Energy Information Administration. 2011–2014. “Annual Nationwide Gasoline Prices.” US
   Energy  Information  Administration.  https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/data/browser/#/?id=3-
   AEO2018&sourcekey=0         on October 1,                           (accessed              2019).US Energy Information Administration. 2020. “Energy and the Environment Explained.” US Energy
   Information Administration.  https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/energy-and-the-environment/
           on August 23,   (accessed              2020).

===== [PDF 第 32 页｜印刷第 238 页] =====
238               AMERICAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL: ECONOMIC POLICY        AUGUST 2021


Verboven, Frank. 2002. “Quality-Based Price Discrimination and Tax Incidence: Evidence from Gas-
   oline and Diesel Cars.” RAND Journal of Economics 33    275–97.                                                               (2):Vlasic, Bill. 2012. “Hyundai and Kia Acknowledge Overstating the Gas Mileage of Vehicles.” New
   York  Times,  November   2.  https://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/03/business/hyundai-and-kia-
   acknowledge-overstating-the-gas-mileage-of-vehicles.html.
